+++++++ Shorten Website Pages 1-10 +++++++

ANNE CHARLTON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR ROBERTSON: Hello everyone I'm Anne Charlton, I’m Labor's candidate for Robertson in the upcoming federal election. It’s great to have Bill Shorten here on the coast today. In my electorate every day when I am out speaking to people I just more and more see families that are struggling. Families that are struggling with the cost of child care, families that are struggling with their day to day bills. We need a Labor Government in Robertson and this is a team that is going to deliver that. So thank you so much for being here today. Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Anne. Great to be here and great to be with Anne Charlton running in Robertson. Emma McBride running in Dobell. Our central coast team. And today we are launching our plan to deliver a fair go for the central coast. We are doing this all around Australia, outlining our regional plans right across this marvellous continent and we'll be doing a fair bit of it this week, pulling together our set of policies, our vision and plan for the future. To end the chaos, to stop the cuts, to take real action on climate change. But I have to say today as we enter the last week of the election it was pretty interesting and instructional to talk to the Year 11 and Year 12 students at this very impressive school. Now a lot of them started school 12 years ago and we're still arguing about climate change 12 years on. This election is about the future. It's about the future we hand on to our kids. It's about the sort of future we want for this country. This government has proven incapable of taking any serious action on climate change in the last six years. This election is a turning point for how the nation deals with climate change. We're ranked 55th out of 60 countries for the way we're handling climate change. The Prime Minister acknowledges that under him our carbon pollution has gone up and is projected to go further up. The future generations of Australia deserve better from the current crop of political debate. Labor will take real action on climate change. We'll help reduce our emissions on 2005 levels. We'll help put 50 per cent of our energy mix being from renewable energy in the future. This is what the future deserves, the very best efforts from people in government in 2019. We've had 13 different energy policies from this government, three different prime ministers and still the power prices go up and our climate pollution goes up. Today we say again in this last week and we will say it every day until May 18th. Vote Labor to stop the chaos on climate. Vote Labor to take real action on climate change. Now I'd like to briefly pass over to my Shadow Treasurer who will talk about the latest boring scare campaign from the government which has no scintilla of truth to it. Over to Chris.
 
CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks very much Bill. Of course today we see the release of a New South Wales Treasury note which reflected the conversations they were having with the federal Treasury in 2015. What does that note confirm? What does it tell us? The federal Treasury was saying that negative gearing reform would be good for the economy, could improve the efficiency of the tax system and was very much on the table for Scott Morrison as Treasurer. When it comes to negative gearing Scott Morrison is full of it. He will say anything. We know that he with Malcolm Turnbull took a submission to the expenditure review committee of the Cabinet to say that negative gearing should be reformed and they got rolled. We know that Scott Morrison said there were excesses in negative gearing. But he's now chosen the cheap, shrill scare campaign instead of good policy. Three years ago Bill and I and the Labor Party announced our negative gearing reform policy. Since then they've engaged in every scare campaign imaginable. They've said housing prices will go up and down, sometimes in the same interview. But all that time they were getting advice from the Treasury that negative gearing reform could be good for the economy and good for the efficiency of the tax system. We know that our negative gearing reforms - carefully designed, grandfathering all existing investments, allowing negative gearing going forward for new properties - are carefully designed to encourage housing supply, put first home buyers on a more level playing field with investors and be good for the budget. Now house prices have fallen on this Government's watch. Josh Frydenberg would have you believe that house price falls under him are wonderful but under the Labor Party would be a disaster. But all that time they've been getting Treasury advice to say what they're telling the Australian people is untrue. So this is just the latest installment, the latest reminder. When it comes to negative gearing, when it comes to housing, Scott Morrison and the Liberals are just full of it. We have the most comprehensive plan. Not just negative gearing reform. The  National Rental Affordability Scheme, build to rent policy. In 2016 we announced a National Housing Supply Council which the government finally caught up with us on three years later yesterday. Australians know when it comes to action on housing, housing supply, it's only Bill Shorten and Labor who have got the positive policies and the plan for action.

SHORTEN: Thanks Chris. Good morning everybody, we might start off with some questions.

JOURNALIST:  On the first home buyers scheme that you signed up to yesterday what problems do you envisage there might be with that policy and does it deserve modelling and consultation to check its effect on house prices.

SHORTEN: Well I'm going to get Chris to supplement it because he's been working very hard in this area of policy. But let's call it as it is. I think the government scratched around yesterday looking for something to announce because as you know all I can do is talk about us. So they've proposed a modest program, a restricted program which may potentially assist 10,000 people. We're not in the business of bagging every idea just because someone else has an idea. But if you want to tackle housing affordability it's only part of a much bigger picture. That's why we need to reform the unfair playing field where property investors are getting subsidised by the Morrison government to buy their sixth or seventh house and first home buyers have got an unlevel playing field. But I might get Chris to supplement.

BOWEN: Well thanks Bill. I think what Australians are sick of is political parties saying just because somebody else thought of the idea we say no. Yesterday we saw an idea. It's unobjectionable, it's modest as Bill said. It will have a small impact. But it's one that we're prepared to tick. In terms of the policy it works best, it will work best as part of a broader suite of reforms as we are proposing. This is all they've got. Five minutes to midnight, a week before an election, six years into government they come up with this idea. Whereas we've been putting ideas out consistently and this can fit in with those ideas. But that's all they've got. In terms of the detail, of course it's up to the government to provide further detail, but we would envisage the scheme working similarly to the Keystart program which has existed for several decades in Western Australia under governments of both persuasions. It's still operating today. It's operated under governments of both persuasions in Western Australia and has broad support. It does provide a similar level of support for first home buyers. So we're prepared to give it a tick. We'll obviously work closely on the implementation details. But it only will work as part of that broader suite of  measures which only Labor can bring to the table.

JOURNALIST: You're saying the government needs to provide more detail, why have you decided to back it without looking at that detail first?

BOWEN: Well as I said, we see it as a modest proposal. The government themselves said that it's only going to have a modest impact. We don't disagree with that. We think it might help some people, a relatively small number of people in the greater scheme of things. We don't think is going to have a big impact either way on the housing market. But it's an idea as I said in keeping with what already happens in Western Australia, what happens in New Zealand and what happens in South Australia. So it's not a new concept in that regard. It's not a radical proposal, it's a sensible enough proposal, one that we're prepared to support. As I said when we see an idea from the other side we don't automatically say no.

JOURNALIST: A certain percentage of those home mortgage holders will default and that cost will go back on to the government. Have you costed that in your Opposition policy costings? And secondly the big four banks have really been receptive to this idea because they're set to make money off it. Is this something that taxpayers should be putting forward?

BOWEN: Well again the proposal is put forward by the government, which we agree with, it concentrates on smaller lenders, non-big four bank lenders which is good for competition. On default -again if it works, as I have said we envisage it working as the Western Australian model has, default is almost non-existent, minimal. The scheme is carefully designed to ensure that default is minimised. As I said it's worked for decades in Western Australia where the default rate, I think I'm right in saying - lower than the average in the broader housing market.

JOURNALIST: So how much will it cost?

BOWEN: Well there's no cost to the budget itself. It's off budget.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, just on housing, do you accept that your capital gains tax changes will make property less attractive to investors and could see housing prices fall?

BOWEN: No. Again, our capital gains tax reforms are part of the broader suite of measures. Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg will defend every tax concession which benefits high wealth individuals. Remembering that 70 per cent of the value, 70 per cent of the value of the capital gains tax concession goes to the top 20 per cent of income earners or wealth, excuse me, in Australia. So this is a highly regressive tax concession which needs to be reformed, needs to be reformed. If you get your income from working at a factory or an office you pay your marginal tax rate. We accept there should be some sort of a discount for capital gains. But the 50 per cent discount, which was designed in a very different era, is no longer fit for purpose. It needs to be reformed and of course all existing investments made before 1 January 2020 fully grandfathered as always.

JOURNALIST: Just on foreign policy, the Prime Minister said today that we shouldn't choose between friends and customers. Should we take a side in the US-China dispute?

SHORTEN: Australian foreign policy should be pursued with Australia's national interests at its heart. The United States, as I've said on many occasions, is our longest standing ally and we have shared values. But I did notice that Mr Morrison characterised China as a customer. You know, I think we need a bit more sophistication from the people who want to be Prime Minister than simply telling one of the largest countries on Earth ‘we just see you as customers’. There's no doubt that trade is important. But I actually think we need to grow up in the 21st century and stop having a simplistic view of the rise of Asia. I don't look at China or Japan or Korea or Indonesia just as customers. I see them as very complex, dynamic societies. I see them with lessons to teach us and things that we can teach them. I see a much more sophisticated relationship than viewing China as some sort of customer going through the Australian McDrive-through and just saying, you know, what can we get from you? In terms of that, the other part of your question where you say is there a dichotomy - we'll just pursue our own interests. America and ANZUS is fundamental to our security and nothing's going to change that. But I think we need to take a more sophisticated 21st century view of the rise of Asian societies rather than just view them as customers.

JOURNALIST: Perhaps the only significant move in opinion poll numbers this morning is in your personal popularity. We note that it comes after the press conference where you tackled last week the issue of your mum and your mother's treatment in news media. Can you tell us, does that rise in popularity accord with what you're getting from the electorate, the sense you're getting as you come, not just to school yards but more broadly around Australia?

SHORTEN: Today is a day of anniversaries and I want to congratulate Mr Morrison on achieving a birthday. It's another anniversary. It's about 2,046 days since I've been Opposition Leader. In that first 2,046 days, I've made a practice of not commenting on the polls - good, bad, indifferent or whatever.

JOURNALIST: Go for it, Mr Shorten.

SHORTEN: No, no. I'm a very disciplined unit and I will wait the next five days and I'll give you all the commentary in five days’ time. But there is another anniversary which I'd like Senator Keneally to talk about.
KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thank you. It is Mr Morrison's birthday and while we wish him a happy birthday, I hope he gets some time today to spend with his family, it is also the fifth anniversary of the Abbott 2014 budget. We all remember that budget. We all remember that budget for the cuts that it inflicted. It inflicted cuts to schools, some $30 billion. Cuts to hospitals, some $57 billion. They cut the ABC. They cut the ABC $35 million. Then they cut it $254 million. Then they cut it $83 million. And let's not forget that this 2014 budget, this horror budget from Tony Abbott, came after his pledge on the eve of election night 2013, where he said there would be no cuts to schools, no cuts to hospitals, no cuts to pensions, no cuts to the ABC or the SBS. What did he do when he got in? He cut schools, he cut hospitals. He tried to make families pay $7 to visit the doctor. In the past four years if their GP Tax had gotten up, some $700 families in Australia would be worse off - he would've added to the already growing cost of seeing a doctor in this country. They cut $1.3 billion from renewable research. They tried to close down ARENA. They tried to introduce $100,000 university degrees. They even cut $500 million from Indigenous Affairs. Before they then turned their back on a voice to the parliament. Let's be clear here today on the anniversary of the 2014 Abbott horror budget. Scott Morrison is just Tony Abbott in a baseball cap. And a minority Morrison-Palmer government would just bring back more cuts and more chaos. More cuts are coming, winter is coming, Mr Morrison. If a Morrison government is re-elected, it'll be more cuts to hospitals, more cuts to schools, more cuts to families, more cuts to renewable energy, more cuts to Australia. We can't afford, we cannot afford five more years of the cuts and the chaos that the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison governments have wrought upon Australia. It's time to vote them out.

SHORTEN: I might just ask Chris to supplement because there's a point which is emerging through Mr Morrison's fantasy promises yesterday about East-West link which deserves your attention.

BOWEN: I'll just add very briefly. You mentioned the Labor Party released our costings on Friday, the earliest any Opposition has released its costings ever. And I note that the government hasn't been able to lay a glove on them. But I'll just make this point. When is Mr Frydenberg releasing his costings? He's making policy up as he goes, big commitment yesterday for East-West Link. He admits it wasn't in the budget, it therefore hits the budget. They've made other commitments through this election campaign adding to around $6 billion. How will this impact on the budget? The government's budget rules are that any new spending must be offset by cuts. If they comply with their rules, where are the cuts? What are you going to cut Mr Morrison to pay for your promises? We've outlined our costings. Bigger budget surpluses. More money for health and education, fairer tax system under Labor as reflected in our costings. I invite the Treasurer to catch up with us and release his costings and reveal where are the cuts.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about the Gladstone Ports worker. He reportedly had his pass suspended, temporarily at least, and his desk packed up. Do you have some concerns that he was treated unfairly and there's some sort of suppression of freedom of speech in that workplace.

SHORTEN: Well, first of all Rosie, happy birthday. Listen I was unaware of this issue at Gladstone Port until last night. I understand the company has put out a statement today and I can add no more to that. But to the more principled part of your question. You know, I've been around work sites for 30 years. As a politician I've been visiting work sites for the last dozen. People are allowed to express their opinions and they should be able to do so without fear or favour. Full stop.
 
JOURNALIST: There's five days to go until polling day, you are spending most of your time in LNP-held seats, so that has to suggest a level of confidence from the Labor side. Is your polling sort of reflecting what the published polls are showing, that Labor is ahead?
 
SHORTEN: I want to talk to as many Australians as I can directly. About Labor's plans to end the chaos, to stop the cuts, to start to vote for real climate action, real action on climate change. To vote for real action on cost of living so that a million Australian households can get additional subsidies for that crippling cost of child care. I want to put forward the case that we need to get wages moving again in this country, put middle and working class people back on top in the system. So Labor is competitive. I don't put it any more strongly than that. There is a mood for change in the nation. We're now approaching 2020. The first two decades of the 21st century is up. A nation can't keep falling off the pace. Six years of this Government doesn't deserve more of the same. You know Mr Morrison made a virtue about being the, you know the only politician at his launch. But you don't only just vote for the leader. You vote for the whole party. The fact that he's got his own party in witness protection shows you that the disunity which makes Australians so angry, the constant infighting - so angry, it is barely masked. So I'm putting the case to the Australian people - vote Labor on May 18th to stop the chaos. Vote Labor to start putting middle and working class people back on top.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten, Clive Palmer has been spotted in Fiji, with five days to go until the election, can I get your view on that?
 
SHORTEN: I don't know what Mr. Palmer is doing in Fiji and I'm not sure if he told me you'd automatically believe it anyway, would you? But the real issue is not Clive Palmer. The real issue is that this character is going to be calling the shots in a Morrison-Palmer-Hanson government. People don't want any more chaos. It doesn't matter if you're Liberal, Labor, whatever you are. People are sick of Canberra focusing on itself and just fighting each other. Love us or hate us, the Labor Party is united. We've got 2,000 days of lived experience to demonstrate that we've learnt our lesson. We are united. We have got a talented front bench, one I'm proud to put out in front of people. And we've got fantastic policies. Chris said before about our costings, we're putting our costings out there because for the Australian people to trust us we know we've got to trust the Australian people and be upfront with our views and our policies. So the problem with Palmer is no matter where he's sighted he will be calling the shots in a Morrison coalition government. That is a recipe for chaos. And Australians are over the chaos. Vote Labor in the House and the Senate to end the chaos.

JOURNALIST: Just some local questions Mr Shorten. The Wallarah underground coal mine is a major here on the coast due to its risk to the region's drinking water catchment. Environment minister Melissa Price has signed off on it. If Labor wins on Saturday would a Shorten government be in a position to reconsider Commonwealth approval?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all we're not going to engage in sovereign risk. But let's face it this coal mine has only ever moved forward under State Liberals and National Liberals. Only ever moved forward under State and National Liberals. Anne Charlton, for example, has been talking to me, in the same vein of environmental protection. We're pleased to announce that we are going to do a review on seismic testing offshore because this is a fantastic marine landscape. And we are practically going to call it the Anne Charlton review of seismic testing because she's been so active. What we want to do is review how they're doing the testing, the methodology. This is, people might not know but this is one of the most beautiful areas of the Australian coast line for whale movements. We've got to protect our environment. So I share the sentiment that you put about the coal mine. The point about it is that with this government if you want more development which doesn't take account of the environment then that's what the Liberals will give you.

JOURNALIST: Why do Labor's policy costings include abolishing the First Home Buyers’ Super Saver deposit scheme but yet you've agreed to build on what Mr Morrison announced yesterday and agree to that measure.

SHORTEN: We're open to good ideas and that's what you'll get under Labor. But we're not open to bad ideas and I might let Chris have the very last word why the government scheme has been a turkey.
 
BOWEN: Well the government's so-called first home savers accounts are an undermining of superannuation. We made it clear from the beginning we would have no part of the undermining of superannuation. It was a thought bubble when the government was desperately trying, desperately trying to come up with a housing affordability plan. We've been consistently opposed to it. We'll tick a good idea. We'll oppose a bad idea. And this morning on 3AW when I was debating Josh Frydenberg he said thousands of people have used it. I asked him how many thousands. He didn't want to answer. The answer to that is two.

SHORTEN: Thanks everybody.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Bill Shorten good morning and welcome.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning Barrie.

CASSIDY: And happy birthday, 52 today.

SHORTEN: And I should actually say Happy Mother's Day to all the mothers of Australia.

CASSIDY: Okay let's start with your costings that came out during the week. Bigger surpluses delivered faster and yet increased spending across the board. Can you understand why some commentators are saying it's all too good to be true.

SHORTEN: Well we're actually just producing a better set of books than the current Liberal government. We've made the difficult economic reform decisions. We're going to stop spending taxpayer money on subsidies to the very well off and the top end of town. So by making that decision we can get to the magic trifecta for Australian budget, Australian economy in the future. The trifecta being, one, we can reverse all the cuts to schools and hospitals that this government has made. We can, two, provide on the 1st of July tax cuts for 10 million working Australians and indeed for 4 million lower paid Australians better than the Government's offering. And, three, we can get bigger surpluses which are a national fighting fund to deal with whatever the world economy might show to us in the next 10 years.

CASSIDY: But to be able to do that doesn't that demonstrate the size of the hit that some of these individuals are going to have to take?

SHORTEN: Not at all. What it demonstrates is that a few Australians have been getting a lot of taxpayer money spent on them and a lot of Australians have been not getting that priority. This election is all about choices. I'm choosing to shut down unsustainable tax giveaways to the lucky few and instead use some of that to improve the bottom line of the budget and use some of that to provide tax cuts for 10 million Australians and use some of that to make sure that I - I want the best hospitals in the world. I want the best schools in the world, the best TAFE, the best kindergartens, the best childcare, the best pensioner dental. It's all about priorities. I can do these things which are going to be great for the vast bulk of Australians because I'm going to stop spending taxpayer money. I mean when we spend on pensioners for their dental care or $2,000 per child for a household for childcare that money is already being spent but just being spent on other people. It's being spent on the top end of town in unsustainable subsidies.

CASSIDY: But it's not just the top end of the town. There are others that are going to be caught up in this that are hardly the top end of the town. In terms of the franking credits and the negative gearing.

SHORTEN: Well first of all let's talk about negative gearing. Our changes are not retrospective. So if you're someone who's invested under the current tax laws - fine. You will still keep getting a taxpayer subsidy if you make a loss on your property investment. In terms of the franking credits we are shutting down an unsustainable subsidy. By that, in plain English, what happens is that people who own shares are getting an income tax refund even though they haven't paid income tax. See the money you get from the shares is income but in retirement that's not taxed. But what happens is - and millions of Australians don't even know this exists and they're quite amazed that it does. We are currently getting taxes off millions of Australians who go to work and we're paying those taxes, which the people who go to work every day pay, and we're giving it back to people, in the form of a tax refund, who haven't paid tax. How can you give an income tax refund to someone who hasn't paid tax Barrie?

CASSIDY: Just back on the negative gearing though. What does your modelling tell you about what will happen to house prices as a result of this.

SHORTEN: What our experts say - and it's not just the think tanks who talk to us but even New South Wales Treasury - what they're all saying is that our changes in the future prospectively will have a minimal, a negligible impact on house prices. What we're simply doing -

CASSIDY: So a minimal means a small fall in housing prices.

SHORTEN: Treasury said in the turnover of houses it would have an impact between 0.3 per cent and 1 per cent. That passes the minimal test. But the point about our, the reason why we're doing the negative gearing is first of all if you're currently negatively geared you get a taxpayer subsidy if your investment makes a loss. Now that's nice that you can get it but it's not sustainable going forward. But no changes for the existing people. Going forward though Barrie it's all about choices. I want to see first home buyers be able to bid for houses and not face the unfair competition of a property investor who is getting a taxpayer subsidy to bid for that house. And it won't have the impact on house prices. I mean I predict Barrie the government's going to run a scare campaign on this. I mean we've seen their absolute rubbish and lies on death taxes. We've seen their absolute rubbish and lies that we're going to confiscate people's utes in 2030. Their absolute rubbish and lies that we're going to end the weekend. And this is just another piece of rubbish and lie. I mean if you want to look at house price falls it's happened under this government.

CASSIDY: Let's go back to the costings and you're talking here about a record surplus in monetary terms about four years from now, right. But that can very quickly disappear. Let's take for example, you're already talking about subsidising wages in the private sector, in the childcare sector. If you go beyond that that will cost more money, billions?

SHORTEN: Well we're not going to. When you say the childcare sector, you say it's the private sector. It's actually a hybrid. It is a sector where there's a lot of government money goes, is paid into it. But what we've seen is market failure. Did you know Barrie that early childhood educators, 96 per cent of them are women. Yet when it ranks across 96 occupations in Australia they're at 92, like they're at the bottom. Early childhood education is important. We've got to keep the talented people in this profession. But the problem is we can't ask parents to pay more money can we? And we shouldn't.

CASSIDY: Yeah but you just said that you won't be going beyond that. So that means you won't be subsidising the wages of aged care workers in the same way.

SHORTEN: No I think that we'll end up doing different parts to lift wages in other sectors. For example ...

CASSIDY: So you will be going beyond childcare?

SHORTEN: No in terms of, we'll get wages moving. The solution we're using for early childhood is unique to early childhood. Let me illustrate how we're going to get wages -

CASSIDY: So what you're saying is you won't be subsidising aged care wages in the same way. It won't be government money.

SHORTEN: That's right. So what we're saying about wages and getting wages moving again is this. Take for instance retail, hospitality, pharmacy. Did you know Barrie that people have had 70, 60, 70, 80 bucks a week cut because of the cuts to penalty rates. So I'm going to see all the low paid workers, who Mr Morrison wouldn't know if he tripped over them, I'm going to make sure that they get their penalty rates back. I'm going to make sure that we treat women equally and we make it easier to run pay equity cases. We're going to clamp down dodgy labour hire and we're going to make sure there's less sham contracting and we must stop the rorts where some guest workers are brought in from overseas to undercut the local labour market and they get exploited in turn. We want to stop the wages theft like we've seen with some of the big companies.

CASSIDY: All right there's another area where some of this surplus could disappear very quickly. You've got a review into Newstart. Now if they recommend, and they surely will, an increase that could mean billions of dollars off the surplus bottom line as well.

SHORTEN: Well what we're doing is we've said that we are going to review Newstart. But we've got to also see in this review the whole network. Because there are other benefits that people receive. We want to see exactly what is the best way to deliver unemployment support to encourage people back into work. I'm not going to pre-empt that.

CASSIDY: It's more likely than not it's going to recommend an increase right and that's not allowed for.

SHORTEN: Well first of all if we I want to talk about that. We don't know what that number is, one. And we're going to talk to the experts, two. We're not going to pour shame, we're not going to say that people on $265 a week should just be ignored because they don't have the same political voice that the property industry has or that other vested interests have. So we are going to be champions for people who are not sharing the Australian dream. But when we come to an outcome, that will be contingent also on how we're going with our employment programs. We announced last Sunday Barrie a measure to stop age discrimination amongst older workers who make up quite a cohort of people on Newstart. Barrie I actually think older Australians once they have got a little bit of grey in their hair sometimes, you know present company excepted, can face unfair treatment. And I'm sick of seeing older Australians chucked on the scrapheap, sent to 30 job interviews in a row. They're not suitable for those jobs and we give up on them. So we're going to give a tax cut to small business to employ older people. So our plan is not just Newstart. It's about making sure that the Australians who don't have the political power to write the newspaper editorials in this country - I'm going to be a champion for all those people who don't have the big end of town on their side.

CASSIDY: The thing that could really go wrong with that plan of course is that the Senate doesn't support raising these revenue raising measures. If they vote against the abolition of these tax concessions you could be down as much as six or eight billion dollars a year.

SHORTEN: Well first things first. If we didn't have a strong balance sheet as we presented to the nation you'd be criticising us for that. Now we present a strong balance sheet to the nation. This government is saying oh well it can't be done. My answer to them is this. We will be the party of reform. This country needs a change. This country's, this government's not trying to do anything for anyone else other than you know give away taxes to the top end of town, to the top tier of tax earners. In terms of the Senate -

CASSIDY: This is about the cross benchers though.

SHORTEN: Well first of all they haven't all got elected. My first advice if Australians are worried about chaos and confusion in the Senate is vote Labor in the House and vote Labor in the Senate. We've got another seven days. I say to Australians if you're sick and tired of the last six years of chaos where you voted for Abbott and got Turnbull. Where you voted for Turnbull and got Morrison. Now you could be voting for Morrison and get Clive Palmer or Pauline Hanson. This country is now entering the third decade of the 21st Century. We haven't got a lot done in the first two decades. We need to start getting on with business in Australia. Real action on climate change. Bridging the inequality gap. Reversing the cuts to schools and hospitals. Get the wages moving, look after the child care, look after dental care for pensioners. The way you do that is don't vote for extreme right wing parties in the Senate. Vote for stability. Vote for Labor.

CASSIDY: All right. You were obviously very angry with the Telegraph during the week and the story that referenced your mother. If you get elected are you planning retribution, are you going to go after them?

SHORTEN: Oh listen the Telegraph and other conservative critics, I realise with them that they are what they are. And by that I mean this. You can pick up the front page of that paper some days and all that's changed is the date at the top. They are campaigning against Labor. It's not all of News Limited. Some of their mastheads, a lot of their journalists, I don't put, lump in the same bucket. But I think a political - if some newspapers and some editors want to be political parties they should just come out and say it. Beyond that though any vote they can take off Labor they took off three or four electoral cycles ago. I mean the real problem here, and let's not even talk about the Telegraph but, if you like, traditional media is that they are under threat. And I have some sympathy that the new media platforms get a lighter run in terms of regulation and taxation than they do. So to that extent I might surprise you. I'm sympathetic to traditional media. But the way forward for them isn't just to become more frenzied. If you've got a business model under challenge, loss of advertising, loss of eyeballs, people not reading it. Perhaps - and I've never run a newspaper so I'm just another consumer of the media like most people. Perhaps rather than doubling down on an old business model of going the gossip, of playing you know the attack stuff and not focusing on the journalism. Maybe there's a way forward for them to look at. But hey I'm just another consumer but I promise -

CASSIDY: Yeah but you might be Prime Minister - you can come after them. You're going after multinationals on taxation. News Corp you can specifically target them. Is that that in prospect? You could change media laws.

SHORTEN: This will surprise you. I look at the policy not the personalities. You know I understand. I've done this job for six years. I've united my team. For six years some in the conservative ranks in the media and the Liberals have just thrown bricks at us. But we've come through all of that. We are united. And one of the reasons why we are competitive - I wouldn't put it any stronger than that - next Saturday is we are respecting the intelligence of the Australian people. If we want the people to trust us we have to trust them first. That's why we've outlined our policies. That's why we've outlined the best set of books that an opposition's ever presented in half a century, I would submit. So when it comes to some of these personality debates, I'm not interested. I'm not running for Prime Minister to square off.

CASSIDY: Was it a deliberate decision on your part not to go and see Rupert Murdoch in the run up to the campaign?

SHORTEN: I'll deal with Australian businesses in Australia.

CASSIDY: OK, just a couple of quick things. On the ABC you've offered this extra funding. But also on the five year funding, you've said you'll have a conversation. Well I think we can assume the managing director David Anderson in that conversation will argue very strongly for five year funding. Is it in prospect?

SHORTEN: I fundamentally believe in an independent national public broadcaster. I've been frustrated at the constant undermining of it from conservative rivals and critics. This is a government who writes more letters complaining about the ABC to the ABC than will invest in the ABC. So we've said we'll reverse the $83.7 million worth of cuts. We've also said we'll provide an additional $40 million for more comedy, more children's shows, more drama, more music. And what I did also say yesterday at the Save the ABC rally is I get that having three year funding cycles is not as desirable for long term ABC planning as five year funding cycles.

CASSIDY: So you prefer the five year cycle.

SHORTEN: I can see the sense of it and we need to sit down with the managing director. But I haven't been elected so that's only a conversation that can happen if and when we're elected. But to anyone who loves the ABC, be it in the bush, be it the people who you know need the emergency warnings. You know I've got a view. My policy for the ABC is two words. ABC everywhere. Everywhere in reach and availability and including in the Pacific.

CASSIDY: Just finally you've got a rally in your own electorate today. I think you're being introduced by the candidate for Higgins. Now that's a seat Labor has never won - it's out at 7.4 per cent. Is a bit of bluff going on here?

SHORTEN: Oh you should meet our candidate running in Higgins. Fiona McLeod, Senior Counsel. She is a rock star. We're running the best candidate we've run in Higgins. I think with Kelly O'Dwyer going there's a lot of disillusioned voters. Fiona McLeod's CV is remarkable. She's represented victims in class actions right through to complicated business transactions. She's a tip top candidate. But there is a mood for change. I make no apology for spending more money on cancer than I will on the top end of town. We can do this because we've got a great set of books, because we've made the reforms. But fundamentally our message Barrie is vote Labor to end the chaos in Canberra. Vote Labor for real action on climate change and the rest.

CASSIDY: All right we're out of time. Thanks for coming in this morning.

SHORTEN: Thanks Barrie.

FIONA MCLEOD, CANDIDATE FOR HIGGINS: Good afternoon everyone. It’s my very great pleasure to be here, my name is Fiona McLeod and I am the Labor candidate for Higgins. The people of Higgins understand that if you change the government you will save the ABC. It is my very great pleasure this afternoon to introduce someone who is responsible for my standing here. Someone who supports women, someone who supports women in leadership and someone who is a strong voice for the ABC. Ladies and gentlemen, Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you. That was Fiona McLeod SC, Labors candidate in the marginal seat of Higgins. Fiona of course is the head of the Australian Law Council, the head of the Australian Bar Council. The go to Senior Council on just about any issue from corporations to victims in royal commissions, so she is a calibre candidate in Higgins showing how seriously we’re taking winning votes in Victoria and how serious we are about promoting women to the ranks of Parliament. Today is about saving our ABC. We need a strong independent public broadcaster in this country. Unfortunately, under the Coalition Government we’ve seen cuts, upon cuts, upon cuts. So today I was pleased to confirm that a Labor government if elected next Saturday in seven days’ time will reverse the cuts to the ABC. The $83.7 million of cuts Mr Morrison has in his Budget, but in addition we want to do more than just keep the ABC treading water. It serves such an important role around the nation, in times of national emergency and bushfire through to comedy, through to children’s shows, expanding Australian values and culture to the wider world. So Labor will invest another $40 million to help make new programs, more local content, more jobs for Australian people who work in Australian media. We’ll also put $20 million extra into the SBS because we think the SBS serves a very important part of the Australian viewing audience. We can do this because we’ve made the hard decisions, we’re a party of reform, and I say to people who love our ABC, people who’ve grown up with it, new generations falling in love with the old favourites on iView, vote Labor to change the government, vote Labor to save the ABC, and together we can ensure that our national public broadcaster which serves the unique and trusted role in Australian cultural, political, economic and social life has a future as bright as the talent it’s producing. Thank you very much, any Questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you’ve already reiterated you support for, keeping offshore processing in place but you’re quoted as hinting that you could move Manus Island to West Papua can we get some clarification on whether you would?

SHORTEN: Oh yes, okay, I understand. We intend to have regional processing operations, we would like to have them in Papua New Guinea. In the event it’s not in Manus we would work with the government of the day to pick another province within Papua New Guinea.

JOURNALIST: Even West Papua?

SHORTEN: Well, West Papua is part of Indonesia. What it is, is the western part of Papua New Guinea. Provinces within the territory, the nation, the borders of Papua New Guinea, not Indonesia.

JOURNALIST:  Mr Shorten can you give some details about exactly who will be getting the childcare industry pay rises and also relatedly the aged care industry is saying that  it will need another hundred thousand workers over the next four years. How can you guarantee that people won’t be going to childcare because of the pay rise instead of aged care and leave them for the dock leader with workers.

SHORTEN: I love the assumption in your question that because of Labor early childhood educators will become a more attractive profession to work in and that’s a good thing. Aged care has got a whole separate set of issues. I mean we can practically have a Q and A on this. Of course I’m going the only leader who goes on Q and A aren’t I? So we don’t have that time here, but when we go to the key issue about early childhood educators pay you put aside and envelope of funding, which we would work with the industry, work with early childhood educators to help supplement the wages, so they in fact are able to get a better wage than they currently get. In terms of aged care, you make a really good point. You know when I called for a Royal Commission. When I was asked about a Royal Commission on Q and A last year, I said that Labor would consider it, because we thought there were problems in aged care. I remember at the time, Minister Wyatt accused me of elder abuse because I thought there should be a Royal Commission. So I agree with aged care industry concerns that we need to do more. That is why we are putting aside thousands of places in TAFE to train aged care workers for example. The argument that we should not pay early childhood educators more because some people might leave other jobs to go and work in it, is not an argument against paying early childhood educators more; it just means that we are going to have to do more over time in aged care. The other thing is that I noticed the Prime Minister has been talking about women. It is great that he is talking about women candidates in Victoria. I just jotted down very quickly the list of some of the women that we are running in Victoria. Jennifer Yang in Chisholm. Fiona McLeod in Higgins. Peta Murphy in Dunkley. Stella Yee in Menzies. We are also running Jana Stewart in Kooyong as well. We are running Libby Coker in Corangamite. Kate Thwaites in Jagajaga. Labor is very committed to seeing women get promoted in politics and I think our record is pretty good. If we get an okay swing at this election, nearly half or half of our MPs will be women. But no amount of belated interest by Mr Morrison can hide the problem that the Liberals have with women. I mean if the Liberals did not have a problem with women politicians, why did Julie Bishop only get 11 votes? Why is Julia Banks running against her own party? Why are so many former members of the Liberal Party, you know Cathy McGowan in Indi, Rebecca Sharkie in Mayo, she worked for the Liberals, Kelly O’Dwyer even in Higgins, observed about the problems their party has. If you want to be fair dinkum about the equal treatment of women in Australian society, you cannot just say it at the last minute before an election. You got to do it in terms of who you support, in terms of politics and also your policies. To square the circle back to where your question started. Labor has a fair dinkum policy on childcare. We are putting aside significant resources for early childhood educators, but even more than that, if you want Australian working women to be able to work, you have got to help them in childcare. Why is it that Mr Morrison won’t match Labor’s policy to provide $1,500 to $2,000 subsidy for nearly a million Australian families, per child per year. I might just hand over to Kristina because she is also interested in the equal treatment of women.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thanks Bill. Today we see from the Prime Minister a desperate last minute attempt to get some credibility when it comes to the issues affecting women in Australia. He has announced a $75 million package to provide some mentoring if women choose to go back to work. This stands in stark contrast to the $4 billion package Labor has announced to help up to a million Australian families with childcare. On top of that, our universal preschool commitment for 3 and 4 year-olds. These are the things that women want and need in order to return to the workforce. Help with childcare, help with preschool, a government that gets what it is to be a woman in Australia, to have a family in Australia, and to combine work and family. It is not just from a desperate Prime Minister at the last moment standing up and, by the way, he had to borrow a National Party woman because he's so bereft of women within his own ranks, to stand there next to him as he announced this desperate last-minute plea for women. Maybe he has a problem with women voters, I do not know. But what I do know is this: He does not have a women's policy. He does not have a fair dinkum policy when it comes to childcare. He does not have an answer to the problem that the fastest growing group of homelessness in Australia is women over the age of 55. Labor has a policy for 250,000 affordable houses. He does not have a policy to solve the gender pay gap. He does not have enough women in his ranks. Let us remember that Scott Morrison was a Liberal Party director. He cannot stand by the side and say, "The issue of pre-selection is a matter for the party and whether or not we have quotas is a matter for the party." He is part of the party machinery. He was the party machinery and he chose to do nothing. This is a desperate Prime Minister and he has told so many desperate lies in this campaign. He said that the weekend is going to end. He lied about his own electric vehicle target. He lied about an environmental protection legislation. He said it had passed the Parliament. The legislation does not even exist. He is lying and the Liberal Party are lying when it comes to death taxes. It is a desperate lie from the Liberals that somehow it is part of Labor's policy that there is a plan for a death tax. This is just a desperate lie from a desperate Prime Minister who today is up trying to desperately plea to women with a $75 million package. Contrast that with our $4 billion package for childcare, to help families in a very real way. Some $1,500, some $2,000 help for childcare. For some families it will be as good as free. Now I am going to make a prediction here. In this negative, nasty, lying campaign that the Liberals are running it is going to get even worse in the next few days and I predict this. This week we are going to hear a scare campaign, more lying from the Liberals when it comes to negative gearing. They have tried every other scare campaign. They are trying every other desperate tactic. They are out there today, desperately pleading to women with some pittance offering and I bet my bottom dollar this week it is going to be a lying scare campaign when it comes to negative gearing.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are you being fair dinkum though by not outlining exactly which childcare workers are going to receive this taxpayer-funded pay rise? Only about half of them?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, when you say the number 200,000 are you including kindergarten teachers?

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible].
 
SHORTEN: Okay well, I would just put that question back to you. What we have budgeted for is for early childhood educators who work in childcare centres, who are not qualified kindergarten teachers. If there are some more, we have an envelope of funding and we will work that through. The real reason why we are getting these questions is that this government is not going to do anything for anyone. Can we just call it out as it really is? You all know that you could send out search parties from here to Christmas to find the Liberal policy on anything new on childcare or equal pay. But do not bother. It does not exist. So really, is this what the government spinners are trying to get you to do? To say that because we have got funding to give early childhood educators, the less qualified ones, a leg up, that somehow this is a bad policy? We have provided an envelope of funding, it is there. We have provided our costings, it is there. Do any of you - I am not even going to beyond, to Australia – do any of you here, as human beings in Australia, think that early childhood educators are paid appropriately? Do any of you think the government is going to spend one cent on early childhood educators? We will work this through. This government cannot play 'gotcha games', when we are the only team on the field to properly fund childhood educators, and how about childcare subsidies. Why is it - you know, Mr Morrison - I thought - in a fairly undistinguished debate at the National Press Club made a real clanger when he said to Australians watching the debate that childcare prices are going down. My goodness me. What planet does this out of touch government, who have run out of excuses, think in any possible universe that we know of, that childcare prices in the last six years haven't gone up and up and up?
 
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Liberal Party should have chosen a day other than Mother's Day to launch their campaign, particularly in the context of all of the discussions around the treatment of women?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, it is up to them when they pick their launch. People will make the judgement. That is up to them. I am not going to take a pot shot on which day. I mean, to me what is more interesting is who is not going to be at the launch and what they are not going to say. I mean, I love that the current fellow says he is sort of 'iron-man' and he does lone ranger and does not need the Liberal Party. Well, maybe the Liberal Party is not coming because they do not really - they are not that keen on him. Let's go to the policies, what they are not saying. Do you think they're going to provide 2.6 million Australian pensioners with dental care tomorrow?
Nope. Do you think they are going to provide a million Australian households with childcare support subsidies of up to $2,000 per child, per year? Nope. Do you think they are going to have a real climate change policy? Nope. So, you know, whatever day this government picks for its launch it does not change the facts. Time is nearly up, they don't have any policies and they are certainly not going to tell you about the deal they have done with Clive Palmer to put corporate tax cuts back on the table, they are not going to agree to tell you about the $77 billion they want to give to the top end of town. This is a government who has nothing good to say for themselves, so I don't care what day they hold their launch. I do not care if they hold it in a telephone box or the convention centre, it does not change the facts. They have got nothing to say, all they are three more years of Liberals, three more years of chaos.
 
JOURNALIST: Thank you. I noticed you call Higgins and Kooyong marginal electorates now. Have you - is that hope - is that wishful thinking or do you - have you seen Labor evidence to suggest you really might take the electorates, the blue-ribbon electorates, of Prime Ministers past and Treasurers past?
 
SHORTEN: Something is going on in Victoria. People don't want more of the same with the government. I think the voters in Kooyong and Higgins, like all over Victoria, all over Australia, have been taken for granted by the government. But it is a matter of record that I have got the most qualified, professionally experienced candidate running in Higgins and that's Fiona McLeod. Jana Stewart is doing a great job in Kooyong against the odds. My point is that our policies are what are resonating with people. And do you know what I hear of most often in Kooyong and Higgins? Real action on climate change. Let's get on with it, no more excuses. But I tell you, as a pretty solid drum beat coming up a close second, save the ABC. People in these suburbs really care about the ABC, as they do all round Australia. So we have got the better policies from the ABC to climate change and I think people are responding very well to being in a marginal seat.

JOURNALIST: Is it hypocritical for the Labor Party to be attacking Angus Taylor over an undeclared interest in a company that he never received a benefit from, when ASIC registers show that Ann Aly and Mark Dreyfus both have shareholdings in companies that they're directors of but that hasn't been declared.

SHORTEN: No, no, I don't know the detail of all of that, but the point is we should have proper disclosure. Beyond that, let's face it, I just wish the government would start disclosing their policies. I don’t know, I set a challenge a couple of days ago, and some of you were talking as we do, and I did say the challenge for Mr Morrison this week is to confirm, is it $77 billion that he's going to disclose that he's giving to the top tier? Will he disclose the deal he has done with Clive Palmer? I mean, I will tell you what I do hear when I travel around Melbourne. People say, really, the Liberal Party of Menzies and Turnbull is doing a deal with the likes of Clive Palmer or the One Nation party? You know, really. This is not the Liberal Party which Victorians have grown up with. It's a far more right-wing creature both within its ranks and the people it's willing to cosy up to.

JOURNALIST: Will you seek assurances though, will you seek assurances that Ann Aly and Mark Dreyfus don't have any…

SHORTEN: I’ve got complete confidence in them.

JOURNALIST: What concerns do you have in regards to your economic costings and policies after the RBA downgraded its forecasts for economic growth?

SHORTEN: Well, I think the RBA made the case indirectly for voting Labor. This is not the time for reckless spending of $154 billion on unaffordable tax subsidies for the property investors who make a loss, for giving people income tax refunds when they haven't paid any income tax. Now is the time for strong economic management in the interests of working and middle class people. Our set of books frankly, has caught the government flat-footed. I think the government tends to believe its own nonsense more than they should. It's not healthy for them. You asked the question, I'm going to do it. What we are doing is the trifecta of what is sensible for solid, sustainable economic growth and economic security. Here's the trifecta: Reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals. When you have got a healthy nation and an educated nation we're doing better than we would otherwise be doing. Fairer tax cuts and tax cuts for the 10 million working Australians from 1 July. That is good, that helps get a bit of consumer confidence going. And strong surpluses. I liken our position of winding back unnecessary tax spending on the top end as building a national fighting fund to deal with the uncertain global economic circumstances. I'll take one more question.

JOURNALIST: Christian leaders have written to both you and Mr Morrison raising concerns over the handling of the Israel Folau case. Now you obviously spoke about this in Wednesday night's debate. Have you received a letter? Will you respond? And what are your thoughts on that issue and its handling?

SHORTEN: Well my position hasn't really changed from Wednesday, but for those who didn't watch the debate. I think we have got two tough issues, the sharp edges of which are bumping against each other. I do believe in religious freedom in this country. I was raised in faith, I get it. People should have the right to practice their religion. It's a core value of Australian life. But I also think that we have got to be careful that we also don't use freedom of religion and freedom of speech to cause unnecessary hurt and pain to other members in the community. I don't share Mr Folau's view that you're going to hell if you are gay. Now, if he wants to think that, that's his business. But I don't share that view, and it's an uneasy point. I don't think he should automatically lose his whole living because he has that view, even though I disagree with it. But of course, he's in an important position, with social media, and people listen to him. It's not easy. So what I have said to the churches who I met with, and I meet with them on a regular basis, is a Shorten Labor government will maintain religious education, we will maintain the freedom of religion, and we believe in freedom of speech. But we also believe that we can't be a nation who allows one group to inflict hurt on another group. So we will work this through. What I will be is I won't be the most right-wing religious ideologue and I won't be the most left-wing person on this issue. You know, I was raised in a faith where I don't put my religion on my sleeve. You are entitled to do that if you want to do it. That's not who I am. I just think in this country we have got to learn to tolerate and live and let live with each other a little more than we do right now. Very last question and I'll share them around.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you said earlier in your press conference that the race is basically over. Do you think a week out...

SHORTEN: No, I didn't. Seven days to go.

JOURNALIST: Paraphrasing, my apologies but you said...

SHORTEN: I just want to be clear, this is a very close election but we are making every post a winner as best we can.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned though that with the record number of pre-poll voters and you said earlier this week yourself that people are switching off from politics, how much more can you actually do in this final week to convince voters that your way is the right one?

SHORTEN: I can talk to as many Australians as I can. I can get our candidates talking to as many Australians as I can. See we have got policies. I've been Opposition Leader now for 2,044 days, just a number, but it's a fair while. We've been working hard. I don't think there's any doubt, and even our harshest critics would say it. Labor is united. I don't think that is untrue. In fact, I know it's to be true. We have learnt our lessons. You can't say that about the Liberals. In the time I have been Opposition Leader I'm onto my third Liberal Prime Minister, I'm onto my second reincarnation of Clive Palmer and we're onto our thirteenth energy policy. They are divided. I think one of the big issues emerging in the final week is a sense that three more years of the same last six years would be chaos. And what's worse is, you have now got some very unusual people, and that's being polite isn't it, of the right wing coming through in the Senate. If you vote Liberal you're banking another three years of chaos, if you vote Labor, we have done the work. We have got policies. At the end of the day, when we say we believe in a fair go for Australians, when we say we believe in a vote for change, it's a vote to end the chaos, it's a vote to properly fund our schools and hospitals, it's a vote to make sure we tackle cost of living issues like childcare, it's a vote to stand up for our pensioners with dental care, it's a vote to take real action on climate change. And I'm going to use every waking minute to put the case for change, because the Australian people deserve a government as worthy as the Australian people.

Thanks, everybody.

ELIDA FAITH, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LEICHHARDT: Good morning, my name's Elida Faith and I am really happy to be here today joined by Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten. Now Bill has spoken this week very proudly about his mum and I would like to take this opportunity to talk about my mum because right now my mum is actually here in the hospital. My mum came in via ambulance yesterday morning at 6 am. She came into a hospital that was already at full capacity. It had an ambulance bay that was full of ambulances with patients on stretchers waiting to be transferred. Mum is still here. She's going to be here for a couple of nights and they are still yet to find her a proper bed. Now, I hear stories like this every single day, every day. And it's one thing to hear these stories, but it really brings it home when it's one of your own family that's experiencing these things. I know that our doctors, our nurses, our paramedics and our hospital workers work really hard. They need help. They don't need more cuts. At this election, far north Queenslanders are going to have a choice. They can choose to have their hospitals properly funded. Properly funded under a Labor government. Or they can choose to see more cuts and chaos under an LNP government. That will be far north Queenslanders' choice. It's not fair that my mum is sitting here still waiting for a bed. This is not good enough for far north Queenslanders. And it's not good enough for my mum. And I am really, really happy to be here today with Bill because Bill is going to make some more announcements in regards to funding for our Cairns Hospital and only Labor has a real plan for far north Queensland.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Elida for sharing a story about challenges to the hospital system in the real world. This is my seventh visit to Cairns since the last election, and in that time Labor has developed and we're launching our plan to deliver a fair go for far north Queensland. This is something which you won't see from the Liberals. It's called a policy. In fact it's called a whole set of plans. But at the heart of Labor's proposition to change the government, to end the chaos in Canberra, is to vote for better health care. And it's a really clear example here in Cairns, in far north Queensland. Labor's already announced $60 million to help upgrade the hospital, make it a training facility. Now the Government has matched that once we announced it. But what we've also said is we want to spend $15 million to improve the emergency department ward to deal with the sort of issues which we've just heard in such personal human terms from Elida. We also have said today, we're launching this today, that we want to upgrade some of the other facilities at the hospital. By using a modest amount of taxpayers money we can improve the efficiency, the productivity, the quality of the treatment which hardworking staff are giving. A $4.2 million addition to upgrade the hospital to provide more waiting facilities, to provide more treatment rooms will mean that lovely fellow we saw, Dan, that he can get treated and seen quickly. That the staff aren't working all around the clock because there is a logjam of inadequate facilities. Australia's health care staff are the best in the world. But they deserve the best resources in the world. That's what a Labor government will give. That's why in this final week, one of the big issues in this election is health care. I mean there's wages, there's climate change but there's no doubt - and cost of living - there's no doubt in my mind that if you're to tally up the three or four key issues one of them is health care. Labor's offering is so much better because what we are doing is we're prioritising the health of the sick over tax breaks for millionaires. We're prioritising better health funding over more subsidies for millionaires and softer tax laws for multinationals.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten today the big issue for Labor is the release of your policy costings due any moment now. But why are you fronting the media before the numbers have been revealed, are you trying to avoid scrutiny over this issue?
 
SHORTEN: Well I've had the joy of being with you for the last number of days and the media for the last 2,000 days. Listen, if you want to talk about who's avoiding things go to the government. Where's their policy for north Queensland, far north Queensland? Where is their health policy? I’ll tell you their policy. More of the same. Now as is appropriate my shadow treasurer and my shadow finance spokesperson, Chris Bowen and Jim Chalmers are going to present a detailed set of costings in Canberra. But let me finish. But we all know that when it comes down to it, and I can give a short version of our costings now, we are the most transparent opposition in the history of federation. We're being upfront with the people of Australia. We are going to reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals. We're going to stop the chaos. We're going to provide tax cuts on 1 July for 10 million working Australians and we will have a better set of books. But the question that Mr Morrison needs to answer is why does he hide how much he wants to give the top tier of tax earners? Is it $77 billion as I initially thought? Or is it a higher number as has been revealed by other people? Why are they hiding this?

JOURNALIST: Why didn't you want to wait until after the numbers were revealed before standing here to answer questions on your detailed economic policy?
 
SHORTEN: I don't mean to be, I don't mean to be a bit of a history wonk here, but in 2010 the Liberals didn't reveal their costings to two days before the election. In 2013 they didn't reveal it till three days before the election. We're being upfront. Now you can punish us for not being upfront or you can punish us for being upfront, pick your poison and choose it. We're being upfront.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, part of what you're talking about when your plan for far north Queensland is the renewable economic zone. Can you talk about the Kidston project obviously is already underway. That's a very major project. How would you actually encourage other projects to come into the area and will your costings that your colleagues are revealing later talk about the cost of what ever Labor's action on climate change is?
 
SHORTEN: Well, thanks for that. Our renewable energy zones, we're nominating a number around Australia, we've nominated north west Tassie, for example, we've nominated this area as well. What we do if we nominate an area as a renewable energy zone is we'll make sure they get fast track access to the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation which has been spectacularly successful. For every dollar of taxpayer money outlaid, it's delivered nearly $2 back. We also want to make sure that this region gets the power that it needs. So we've got an energy modernisation fund of $5 billion. So, by making this a renewable energy zone, that's what happens. But you go to the bigger question of climate change. One of the two or three big issues in this election is climate change. There can be no doubt about it. And the fact that this government runs a dishonest pretense that somehow they have a climate change policy when we all know they don't. You all know it, we all know it, because if they were Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. The question on climate change is when will a government get real about it? And I have formed and reached the conclusion, which I suspect many Australians have reached, that the Liberal Party will only get serious on climate change when they lose an election. See if they think they can get away with their scare campaign they will keep being the knuckle-dragging, climate change denying, coal-wielding warriors that they are. The Liberal Party in Australia and the National Party in Australia need to lose an election to discover that climate change is real. Now I've got Penny Wong here, she was a climate change minister and I think she can also give some of the context to why at this election if you want real change and real action on climate change, if you want to end the chaos on climate and get certainty back into climate change policy, vote Labor. Penny.
 
PENNY WONG, OPPOSITION LEADER IN THE SENATE: I just want to make a couple of comments. We see today on the front page of a couple of the papers, the Coalition saying we've got a policy on climate change. Well it's their fourteenth. It's their fourteenth. The reality is this. We have seen an internal war inside the Coalition on climate for a decade. A decade. And it has led them not only to kill Malcolm Turnbull as Prime Minister but you might recall in 2009 to kill him also as Opposition Leader. And you know what? The war's still going. Kathy Ganley, Scott Morrison's candidate for Solomon, told someone who supported renewable energy, and I quote, "You need to stop taking the drugs you're on." You need to stop taking the drugs you're on. That's what Scott Morrison's team thinks about renewable energy. And I do want to just make a comment about Mr Entsch. Mr Entsch has recently discovered climate change. He's recently discovered climate change. He seems to be wanting to talk a lot about it. Well he's as quiet as a church mouse in Canberra. Talks a lot about it now, in the shadow of an election, up here in far north Queensland, quiet as a mouse in Canberra. And people should not forget this. Mr Entsch for all he talks about climate change was part of the chaos and part of dragging down Malcolm Turnbull. Helped the far, hard right drag down Malcolm Turnbull, signed the petition. So he shouldn't come to far north Queenslanders now and tell them that he cares about climate change.
 
JOURNALIST: Will the cost of increasing Newstart be included in your policy costings?
 
SHORTEN: All of our costings will be revealed in the next hour. What we've said is we think that Newstart should be reviewed and we're not reviewing it to lower it, but until that review is complete, you couldn't put a number on it. Also to be far to Katina's question earlier, where she asked me about our climate change costings, the costings of what the government will expend will be contained in the document.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten you've announced, released the figure of how much your crackdown on tax breaks will save. How much is Labor spending, will it be an overall figure in the costings about how much you'll spend on all of the commitments you've made?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, but I think that, listen I don't want to steal Jim and Chris's thunder, they have been working over the last number of days, weeks and months. But let me put it to you this way. We go to this election with a better set of books. See this is where the government's inherent contradiction is finally exposed. See, we are actually shutting down tax expenditure on tax subsidies for property investors, for very wealthy millionaires. We are not going to spend taxes on them anymore. And that means that we can do the trifecta of Australian politics. One, we can reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals, $7.2 million at Cairns Hospital for example. Two, we can provide fair tax cuts for 10 million Australians and in fact for the bottom 3.6 million earners it will be better than what the government has offered and we can look after our pensioners who never get thought about in our government's agenda of fight for the wealthy. And three we can provide better surpluses. So that's the trifecta. Looking after the people on the fixed incomes and the working, wage earners of Australia, reversing the cuts to schools and hospitals, and a better surplus. And you all know why. Because we have got the courage to trust the Australian people, to put forward our views well ahead of the election. This government can't match our deal for pensioners, our support for childcare, battling households and indeed better tax cuts for low income earners because they spend all their time defending the status quo. They are determined to defend handing out tens and tens and tens of billions of dollars to people who don't need it at the upper end. As a result because of the choices we make, we can have a better set of books. The one thing that does concern me about this government is not only are they defending the status quo, but I fundamentally believe it's in the Liberal and National DNA to try and give new tax cuts to the top end of town. Mr Morrison makes a great show on the high moral ground. He's not a man who flips or flops. And indeed, 250 times he's said that he wanted to give the business tax cuts, $80 billion to big business. 250 times. Now miraculously he's had a conversion eight days out from the election and said “oh I actually didn't want to do that”. But the problem is that you don't even have to believe his last minute conversion. Look at his deal he's done with Clive Palmer. I'd like to ask Senator Keneally who's had a good look at these arrangements just to understand when you do a deal with Clive Palmer, he never gives you something for nothing.
 
KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thanks Bill, thanks everyone. Well we have seen in this election campaign that Scott Morrison is willing to do a desperate deal with Clive Palmer in his desperate attempt to cling on to power. And we are seeing more and more evidence that this deal is not just a preference swap. It is actually - well frankly it's an exchange of wardrobe. It's an exchange of workers. We've seen the photos already. Here we've got photos of that. Actually we were just at the aquarium weren't we. It kind of puts me in a Dr Seuss frame of mind. One fish, two fish, yellow fish, blue fish, from here to there, there to here, funny things are everywhere. I mean these guys, they're sharing shirts. Think of the inefficiency of this campaign. I mean the volunteers have to go off to some back room and change shirts and then come back out having spent half the day handing out for the Libs, now they're handing out for Clive Palmer. Maybe Mr Palmer could just order some of those reversible shirts you know like basketball players have, blue on one side yellow on the other. Probably be more efficient. He can probably get them made in China too. So you know check that out Clive. But look, don't take my word for it. Quite frankly, we've got now the director of the Palmer United Party or whatever they're calling themselves now, United Australia Party. Clive Palmer's party in Victoria putting on social media, she says here, just this week, she says that actually where it is happening where the Libs are helping us, the Libs are funding the workers. Clive Palmer's state director in Victoria has just put it out there in social media. The Libs are funding the workers to hand out for Clive Palmer's party. But then she goes on, she says or it might be they are Lib volunteers helping us to help them. I'm going to come back to that. She says because of course a volunteer is never paid are they? You know who else hasn't been paid for years by Clive Palmer? His workers. And you know who's going to get a big payday if Scott Morrison wins. Clive Palmer. Clive Palmer does nothing for free. He gets other people to pay for it. He got the Commonwealth to pay his workers. Now he's getting the Liberals to pay the people handing out for him. She says, Catriona Thoolen, state director of Clive Palmer's party in Victoria - the Lib volunteers are helping us to help them. The Lib volunteers are helping us to help them. What kind of help is Mr Palmer expecting? You can be sure he is not expecting just a handshake if he gets elected. He's expecting that $80 billion tax cut to the top end of town that Scott Morrison has hundreds of times staked his word and his reputation on that he's going to deliver. Well Clive Palmer is waiting for that payday if Scott Morrison is re-elected. So, I look forward to those shirts Clive, check them out. I’m sure you can get them online. EBay. China, somewhere.
 
JOURNALIST: A question for Mr Shorten, Angus Taylor said today that he plans to reduce energy bills by 25 per cent. What's your reaction?
 
SHORTEN: Oh well, I’ll sell you the Harbour Bridge if you're silly enough to say you want to buy it. I mean this is their 14th policy. The one thing you can set your clock by in Australia is that when the Liberals say that they've got a new, hey presto, we're going to reduce your power prices, your next bill will probably go up. I mean haven't we heard this before? How many times did the government call you out into the courtyard into Parliament and said, Victory! Peace in our time! We've solved the energy crisis. Gas is going to be cheaper, energy is going to be cheaper. I mean hadn't they already told us that they had lowered power prices? Now they're going to do it again? The reality is the single biggest driver of power prices in this country is a lack of an energy policy. Because people won't invest the extra generation needed to put the supply of energy in which will lower the price. So there is a paralysis at the heart of this government on energy. So when they say that they've got their 14th policy, just ask them how their previous 13 policies went. Ask them where Malcolm Turnbull is and ask them why they don't take real action on climate change. So, you know I think people who pay their energy bills should take this latest "breakthrough” announcement as seriously as they’re still paying for the cost of the last 13 "breakthrough" announcements.
 
JOURNALIST: What's your energy policy costing over 12 months, four years and ten years?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all our energy policy will drive down prices.

JOURNALIST: What will it cost?
 
SHORTEN: Well it won't because we're driving down prices. And the issue is, in terms of some of the individual levers we've got our $10 billion clean energy fund, but that actually delivers a return. We're going to put $5 billion dollars into energy modernisation, which will put downward pressure and create greater efficiency and reliability on our energy systems. There are I think - and again, you're very cunningly getting me to talk about the detail which Jim and Chris will do in the next half hour - but no that's fair enough, you're a trained and skilled interrogator. About $500 million plus. We're going to put $300 million dollars aside to make sure that our trade exposed aluminium, steel, cement sectors are not at a disadvantage globally. We've got some other modest measures. At the end of the day though this argument about the cost, you know and we've had the good chance to talk about it frequently, in terms of the taxpayer, our plans are much cheaper for the taxpayer. In terms of the environment, our plans are so much better than the government's because their complete lack of ambition on reducing carbon emissions is not funny. And in terms of corporate Australia, 250 companies are affected by our industrial safeguards and they have the option with all of the tools we're giving them to choose least cost abatement at individual companies.

JOURNALIST: You'll be subsidising the wages of childcare workers. I think you've stated about 100,000 workers. But there are nearly 200,000 workers in the childcare industry in Australia. So which will miss out under Labor's subsidy?

SHORTEN: Well, I'll tell you who's missing out now. Everyone.

JOURNALIST: But under Labor's plan.
 
SHORTEN: Now let's not just glibly brush off the problem that we're solving here.
 
JOURNALIST: But is it solving it if half of them miss out?
 
SHORTEN: If you think the status quo is fine, talk to an early childhood educator. The reality is that out of 96 occupations they come in 92nd. And I know you're a keen advocate for the rights of women. The reality is this is a 96 per cent feminised industry. The market's broken when it comes to the payment of early childhood educators. I am sure that you and millions of other Australians agree that we need to do more for our early childhood educators. They're the first kids to which we entrust, the first people to whom we entrust the kids outside of the family unit. So we've come up with an envelope of funding to improve their wages. We'll work with the for profit sector, we'll work with families and parents. We have an envelope of funding. We've got a plan over the next 10 years and the beauty of our plan - we are tackling a problem this government puts in the too hard basket, which is a very big basket. We are going to do the right thing by a very important section of the economy who experience unique difficulties. And the way we're going to do it, is it doesn't cost parents because we'll put in price controls and we'll make sure that the money which is allocated to wages goes to wages.

JOURNALIST: If you are tackling the problem but there are still workers that are missing out aren't you then only tackling it by half?
 
SHORTEN: I used the word before, perhaps I should focus in on it again. We have an envelope of funding. We have an envelope of funding. What Labor does with its envelope of funding is we're going to improve the wages of early childhood educators.

JOURNALIST: Will it be all the early childhood ...
 
SHORTEN: Well the money is there. That's the difference between me and the Liberals. And let's never forget it. Ask the Liberals or get your colleagues on the Liberal bus to ask Mr Howard - oh, not Howard, he's not even turning up is he? Morrison. Ask Mr Morrison what he's going to do to lift the wages of early childhood educators. Do you think he has one plan? Any plan? Of course not. He doesn't get it. This government's stuck in the past when it comes to sorting out wages of low paid women workers. And we've been able to do this and what's more is we've even been able to do something better for families. Did you know that because of Labor and because we've got a better set of books we can provide genuine, no nonsense cost of living relief for nearly a million Australian households. I want to specifically right now for 10 seconds address the working parents of Australia, the nearly million households whose income is less than $174,000. Vote for Labor for real change and to end the chaos in childcare. Mr Morrison, somewhat I think foolishly, said on Wednesday, childcare costs are going down. Well I don't know what bill he's paying, but I tell you that's not the experience of a million Australians. We will provide a subsidy of up to $2,000 because we've got a better set of books.

JOURNALIST: Senate crossbenchers are threatening to block some of the revenue measures which underpin your set of books. What will you choose if the Senate makes you choose? Your spending promises or keeping the budget in surplus?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, let's win the election before we start talking about how we deal with the Senate crossbench. But, I think your question does highlight the danger and the risk of voting LNP or for Palmer Party, or whatever his latest advertising company is called, or indeed One Nation. If you vote for those small parties or you vote for the Liberal Nationals who rely upon them - chaos, chaos, chaos. The biggest single message I get: get real on climate change, get real on cost of living, look after the pensioners and please end the chaos in Canberra. A vote for Labor in the House and the Senate is the best way to make sure that the crazy chaos which you are alluding to just never happens. Vote 1 Labor.
 
JOURNALIST: The Senate crossbench is not a new phenomenon, no one has controlled the Senate for more than a decade, it is a valid question, which would you pick?
 
SHORTEN: You're allowed to ask the question and I'm allowed to answer it. No, don't be smart. Now what I'm saying here is this. We haven't even won the election. Imagine if I said oh, we'll win the election and we'll do this. How arrogant would that be? My conversation is actually not with the bar scene from Star Wars of the crazy right in the Senate who Mr Morrison's depending on for re-election. I don't care about them. I’ll let you into a secret on how I think. I'm interested in the voters. I'm interested in the fact that people are waiting here in this hospital ward to get attention. I'm interested not in your question about the Senate, I'm interested in a million Australian households who are battling with child care. I'm interested - no wait a second, I'm going to talk about the people that sometimes the media don't ask about. There's 2.6 million pensioners in Australia. Have any of you got any idea how good their oral health is? Do you know what it's like if you're a pensioner not able to get attention on your teeth? And I'm also addressing young Australians. They are as forgotten in this election by this government as pensioners. Young Australians are sick and tired of an anti-science, anti-climate change, anti-rational, science-phobic government in Canberra. We cannot afford to keep selling out the future by just pretending that more of the same is good enough. What the Australian people deserve is a government as good as them. I look forward to listening to Jim and Chris unveil our better set of books and we'll see you all very soon. Thank you very much.
 
ENDS

SUBJECT/S: Beaconsfield Mine collapse

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: 17 miners went underground at Beaconsfield, there was a catastrophic rockfall. 14 came out and three disappeared. In the intervening 14 days until today, we discovered one man, Larry Knight had lost his life, two others had - Todd Russell and Brant Webb had, through a massive act of courage, they survived underground trapped for two weeks.

When I think through this campaign about everything that's happened in two weeks, the life that we've all packed in, it is to me still a constant miracle that those two men survived.

It's today that we had the funeral for Larry Knight in Launceston.

I've been in touch with Brant and Todd during the campaign. I've rang them up to see how they are going, they are okay. I am sure there's many occasions, especially at the time of the rockfall, where their mind flashes back to that ordeal.
 
So to Todd and Brant, I've kept in touch with them over the years, they're two very special people. And to all of those who did the rescuing - and the rescue wasn't done you know, the police were excellent, emergency services - but the people who did the rescue of that case were actually eight other miners from the same mining company and a contractor, digging through incredibly hard rock.
 
Beaconsfield will stay with me forever. It reminds me of true courage, it reminds me of loss and it reminds me that we can never take our family for granted.

To Brant and Todd and the families; another anniversary, well done. I know there were times where you didn't think that you'd reach this point.
 
Thank you everyone.

ENDS

CORINNE MULHOLLAND, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR PETRIE: Welcome to Redcliffe Hospital, one of Queensland's busiest hospitals. Every year some 68,000 patients come to this hospital to get emergency treatment at the emergency department. It's also got one of the busiest oncology units also in the state. Today we have gone on a tour of this amazing hospital and met some of the fantastic nursing, doctors, staff who are doing incredible work for our local patients here in the Petrie electorate. We've chatted to patients and families who were going on one of the biggest battles of their life, battling cancer and we thank people like Debra and Judy who spoke to us today with their families in the middle of their treatment. Labor has a health action plan for the Redcliffe Hospital. It includes a $10 million upgrade to our emergency department. As I said, one of the busiest in Queensland. We also have a $10 million plan jointly with the State Government to deliver an MRI machine here at this hospital, a hospital that does not have an MRI machine. As I said one of the busiest in Queensland. We also have a plan to reverse the LNP's $4.2 million worth of cuts that have been dealt a devastating blow here at our hospital. Today I'm so pleased to be joined by Bill Shorten our Labor leader to make a further exciting announcement for our hospital. Today we're announcing a $12.2 million dollar package. A $6 million dollar plan to buy a second CT scanner for this hospital. We're also going to take a $6.2 million upgrade of the ICU to benefit the amazing patients that call this town and this community their home. The choice, ladies and gentlemen, at the next federal election could not be any clearer. Between a team, a Labor team, that values this hospital and this local community and the Liberal National team and a local member in Luke Howarth who has cut, cut, cut from this hospital. The only way the people of this community will get an upgrade to this hospital and reverse those cuts is to vote Labor. I'd like to invite Bill Shorten now to make some further remarks about this exciting announcement today.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Good morning everybody. Fantastic to be here on the Redcliffe Peninsula in the seat of Petrie, one to watch on election night. We're running an absolute first class candidate, Corinne Mulholland. I'm here because as the election comes to a close, Labor is saying that one of the key issues for voters in making up their mind, making a choice, is the quality of healthcare and Medicare in this country. Labor throughout this election campaign has said we want better hospitals not bigger tax loopholes. Today we're announcing $6.2 million for the ICU, the intensive care unit here. $6 million for the second CT scanner. We're also fleshing out the cancer package I announced in budget week. We'll be investing $60 million in the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital to provide cutting edge technology, oncology services to make sure that Queenslanders in the fight of their lives get the support they deserve. Some of you have had the chance to visit the oncology ward and talk to people dealing with cancer treatments. There's 300,000 Australians getting treatment for cancer right now. 50,000 of our fellow Australians will die. We haven't solved every form of cancer. Cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. So today Labor is again saying that in this election people have a choice. Do they want better support with out-of-pockets for cancer or do they want bigger tax loopholes? Do they want to see us invest in pensioner dental? Do they want to see us invest in out-of-pockets for cancer? Do they want to see us repair the cuts to hospitals? Or do they just want to give $80 billion away to the top end of town? These are the choices in this election and Labor is committed to saying that when you vote Labor you'll get better Medicare, better healthcare, not bigger multinational profits or indeed bigger tax loopholes.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten can I ask you a question on border security? Last night in the debate you mentioned that Labor would seek to revive the New Zealand resettlement offer that's on the table. If you do that would you also look at closing that so-called back door to stop people resettled in New Zealand from coming to Australia under existing migration laws?

SHORTEN: Yes, what we would do is seek to use the same formula which the government's used with the United States. So, the same system the government uses is the one we would use in our discussions with New Zealand.

JOURNALIST: Tanya Plibersek has raised the Malaysia solution this morning when talking about resettlement deals and she is also suggested that the US could take more refugees from Manus and Nauru. Would you consider revisiting the Malaysia solution or asking the Americans to take more refugees?

SHORTEN: We are committed to maintaining strong borders. We have made it clear that we will do boat turn backs where the Defence authorities and Border Security say it is safe to do it. We are committed to the view that anyone who comes by boat, via a people smuggler, will not be processed and settled in Australia, full stop. Now, we have also said, and you were all at the debate last night night, that what we don't believe is that we should keep people for, you know, semi-indefinite detention. I congratulate Malcolm Turnbull for the work he did. We think there are opportunities if other regional places want to take people. That's fair enough. Having strong borders shouldn't make Australia a cruel country. We will work it through. But I am not going to have the government run their scare campaign, somehow saying that because we believe in the humane resettlement of people in third party countries, that that is not a commitment to strong borders. I notice that Peter Dutton's been let out of wherever he has been and he's popped his head up in Townsville. Kristina and I were talking about and she has got some observations that I think she should share with you.

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY: Thank you Bill. Look, Peter Dutton has been let out of his cave. He has been kept underground somewhere by the Liberal and the National Party. But they have let him out of his cave to appear on national television. In fact, to travel all the way to Townsville. Look, frankly this is a desperate attempt by the Liberals to scare Australians. This is a desperate attempt to cling to power. This is a desperate attempt to deploy the most toxic man in Australian politics and to have him out there raising the spectre of fear and division in the community. The Australian people understand and support the commitment that both parties have to strong borders, but the Australian people do not believe we need to be a cruel country, cruel to people on Manus and Nauru in order to secure our borders and keep them safe. Peter Dutton, been let out of the cave, out there in Townsville, trying to scare people. One has to ask is Mr Dutton indeed auditioning for the…some job in the future. Perhaps Peter Dutton is showing us his audition tapes for the role of leader of the party after the election.

JOURNALIST: Just on borders and Home Affairs, one of the things that Peter Dutton did say this morning in Townsville is that you should outline who your Home Affairs minister will be. You've pointed to who your Health and your Education Minister will be. Can you give us even just one name of someone within your party who you would consider fit for that role?

SHORTEN: I have got plenty of people who can do the role. But I tell you what, unlike the Liberal Party I don't want to take my orders from Peter Dutton. What a joke this fellow is. He destroyed Malcolm Turnbull. He destroyed Malcolm Turnbull. One of the single biggest issues that we hear wherever we travel, I'm sure you hear it for your exhaustive inquiries too, is what people really hate about modern politics is the turmoil, the backbiting and the pushing. Peter Dutton has never properly accounted or shown any remorse for tearing up the Liberal government of Malcolm Turnbull. We don't take orders from him, that's one of the many good reasons why I'm in the Labor Party. We will put forward our full ministry after the election. But since we're talking about ministerial lineups. Has anyone seen their environment minister? Do you know they've had five defence ministers in six years? This is a government in ... and by the way, what is the real role of Clive Palmer in this Government? Clive Palmer. Pauline Hanson's outed Clive Palmer and said that he was trying to heavy her to vote for $80 billion of tax cuts last year. Just how much power will Clive Palmer, the unnamed minister at the Morrison Cabinet table actually have?

JOURNALIST: You mentioned scare campaigns earlier. Today, Labor is linking Clive Palmer with the government's former proposed company tax cuts. The Treasurer has said it's now dead. Are you not running a scare campaign of your own with this?

SHORTEN: Well let me just go to what Mr Morrison said. First of all, does anyone think Clive Palmer doesn't want a corporate tax cut for big business? That's certainly what Pauline Hanson's made clear he wants. Does anyone not really think that Mr Morrison doesn't have one of the biggest IOU cheques in Australian political history to Clive Palmer if he gets returned? I mean, Clive Palmer ain't going into politics to, you know, raise taxes for big business is he? So Mr Morrison I think he's the real problem here and you say, you know, trying to give Mr Morrison a leave pass in recent times because of his sudden conversion to not wanting to give a tax cut to big business. It's in the Liberal DNA. I have here a quote from what Mr Morrison said. It's just about the one year anniversary of when he said it. Morrison, quote: "We're fully pursuing our enterprise tax plan. Nothing's changed on that. We remain committed to this. We don't flip or flop on these things." Well you be the judge. Was he lying then or is he lying now? The reality is that the Liberal Party for the last three years has wasted the nation's time pursuing a one point economic plan: tax cuts for big business. And we see it again last night when he was evasive, he still wouldn't confirm that he wants to give $77 billion to the top tier of tax earners. The Liberal Party serve the top end of town in Australia, they serve the vested interests. Labor wants to ensure a fair go for all Australians.

JOURNALIST: On Robodebt, social advocates have talked about the legalities of this program and groups like ACOSS have asked Labor to more solidly outline what you would do on that. What's your view on the legality of Robodebt? What would Labor do with that system?

SHORTEN: We want to make sure that people aren't receiving welfare to which they're not entitled to. And no one gets a leave pass on that. But I do think that there are smarter ways of getting people to pay back money and indeed investigating what people actually really do owe rather than giving it to the debt collectors. This is a government who've got no problem giving $80 billion to the top end of town. But if you're on Newstart and you found yourself a job and you accidentally got an extra weeks' pay, they find the debt collectors for you. This is a government who if you are weak and powerless in this society, who if you're someone who this government doesn't think supports it, they'll chase you. And if you're at the top end of town like Mr Palmer, he apparently owes the Commonwealth taxpayer $70 million doesn't he? Because the Commonwealth has paid his debts to the workers. See that's the difference. If you are poor and disadvantaged this government will sic the debt collectors onto you. But if you're Clive Palmer and you owe your workers tens of millions of dollars, Mr Morrison will put you in the Senate.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you told one of the patients in there this morning with a week to go that lots of people are tuning out. So, whose fault is that? Are you failing to engage voters or have people just had a gutful of modern politics?

SHORTEN: Well I do think that not everyone's fully engaged in the election. I think some people are turned off by the negativity too aren't they? Also, what I was thinking in that, in an oncology ward is these people they're in the battle of their lives. One of the ladies, she moved up from Gippsland. She's moved up to Queensland, resettled with her sons who were there. We met the son there too. She got, this was last April, she's now had a diagnosis. That was her first treatment today. Like when you get that news I'll tell you what you're not greatly fussed about what order are how to vote cards in somewhere are you. But having said that this is why this election is important. Because when you strip away the noise and some of the negative carry on and all of that, if you are in the fight of your life don't you deserve to have a government in Canberra who's as brave as you? Don't you deserve to have a plan for the future. What I learned out of last night's debate is I saw for the first time Mr Morrison's threadbare real agenda on display. You know we had five questions which is such, we each asked each other questions. There were five. They were all about Labor policy. We don't talk about Liberal policy because they've only got tax cuts unfunded in two elections time. So what I'm saying to voters as we approach the last week is Mr Morrison thinks that cancer treatment's free. Mr Morrison thinks there's no problem with childcare costs, he thinks it is going down. Mr Morrison thinks he's got climate change under control. This government is out of touch. They've only got one plan which is to look after the special vested interests. For me making sure that this hospital - this is a modest hospital - is the centre of this community. I want it to have better resources. Labor's made choices. We're going after some of the unsustainable tax subsidies at the top end because for me when sick people get a fair go in this country we are a better country for everyone.

JOURNALIST: Why are you palming off the questions about resettling refugees in the United States when it’s Tanya Plibersek who raised the prospect and not Peter Dutton? Can we get a yes or no about whether you consider that deal…

SHORTEN: Interesting use of the word Palmer there. No, we're not. I congratulate Malcolm Turnbull - that's not something you hear the Liberals do - for keeping that deal on track with President Trump. I actually don't think that we should keep people in indefinite detention forever when we can resettle them in other countries. I'm sure you'd agree with me. So we're not. The point about it is if we've got people who have been in indefinite detention really for six or seven years let's move them on. Let's find third party countries, that's all. But let's not fall for the Government's scare campaign. I mean this government, they've said we're going to take the ute off you. They’ve said that you're going to lose your weekend. They’ve said that there are death taxes when there aren't. You know they want to, they should be ashamed of themselves signalling the people smugglers a week out from the election to try their hand. They will find us completely resolute working with border security exactly as we said.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on your health plans you've talked about the election being about choices. You have a number of policies health is one where there's quite long term spending plans. Will the costings tomorrow show the budget impacts over the medium term, over a decade?
 
SHORTEN: Four and 10 years. Yes.
 
JOURNALIST: Labor has been critical of the use of tax havens like the Cayman Islands but it's been revealed today that IFM Investors, a fund manager owned by 27 industry super funds including Australian Super owns infrastructure assets that are ultimately held in trust in the Cayman Islands to deliver a return for their members here in Australia. Do you accept that this shows there are legitimate uses for tax havens in Australia?

SHORTEN: I believe completely in transparency. I don't want to see a Caymans Island based company take over our health system as has been given the green light by this company. Global capital moves around but we need to see transparency. We need to see where tax is really paid. It's not good enough in this country that we have large multinationals paying no tax or nearly next to no tax. You know for me it's about a fair go for all Aussies. The reality is, you run a local newsagency, you're a hard working journalist, you work in a hospital, you have got to pay the tax pretty much as it is levied on you. You don't have the chance to split your income, you don't have the chance to park it in the Caymans. I for one, am sick and tired of weak conservative governments not demanding greater transparency in terms of what goes on with their taxation.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten you're talking about pursuing new third-party resettlement options, New Zealand is clearly on the table, is Malaysia also on the table?
 
SHORTEN: There's no arrangements to talk with Malaysia, we're not the government. You use the word new. New Zealand been on the option, on the table for four or five years. You have got to ask yourself why the government hasn't pursued it. Do they want to prolong this issue to score political points? Listen, I know that the government wants to scare people about boats. Well, I'm calling that out. I'm not the government. What I'm saying here is that this government has run out of anything to talk about. What a surprise that the Thursday or Friday of the second last week, government's tried all the other scare campaigns. I noticed today, no one's asking me about that nonsense discussion about climate change costs, when in fact the cost of not acting is greater. We all know the government has pressed the panic button. They want to scare people on boats. They know we've got the same policy on boats. We will have a very good foreign policy because I've got Penny Wong and they don't. You know we will make sure that we help resettle people. But you are sophisticated analysts - you know we have got the same policy on boat turn backs, you know we have got the same policy on regional re-settlement, you know we're committed to resettling people overseas and not letting them stay here. This nation needs more than scare campaigns. You saw him last night. He thinks the childcare costs are going down. He thinks that cancer treatment is free. He thinks that first home buyers don't have a problem in the market. Goodness me, he even surprised me when he said - climate change, yeah we're going to make all our targets. Rubbish, rubbish, rubbish. All that man can do is talk about us. They don't offer any plan for the future of Australia, they just want to give their corporate tax cuts, back on the table of old mate Clive. They want to give $77 billion away to the top tier of tax earners. We know they have no plans. You know they have no plans, whereas we want to help the sick people in this hospital. Thanks everyone.

ENDS

WEDNESDAY, 8 MAY 2019

FIONA PHILLIPS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR GILMORE: Well welcome everyone to the Gilmore electorate. We're here at Nowra at Grand Pacific Health. I'm Fiona Phillips and I'm proudly Labor's candidate for Gilmore. I'd like to welcome Bill Shorten to our electorate today, Catherine King,  Stephen Jones and Sharon Bird, who are all regular visitors to our electorate. Look one of the biggest things that people tell me is they are concerned about their health. They are concerned that they cannot get elective surgery. We have wonderful staff that work in our hospital but it's a growing issue in our community. I spend a lot of time out knocking on doors and talking with people and I've lost count of the amount of people that I've met that have been waiting sometimes for a couple of years for elective surgery. It doesn't matter if it's a young person or a more elderly person in our community, health is such an important issue. So that's why I'm really pleased to welcome everyone today for a great health announcement. So I'll hand it hand over to Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Fiona and good morning everybody. Great to be back in Nowra. It's my sixth or seventh or eighth visit here with Fiona Phillips. We've got our team from the Illawarra and the Shoalhaven here and of course Catherine King. Today Labor is pleased to announce yet another fantastic health initiative. What we're going to do as part of our $2.8 billion Better Hospitals Fund is we're going to use a quarter of a billion dollars of that fund which we've already announced to invest in better care in our hospitals. Our hospital systems are at breaking point. And we see that and what we need to do is provide more support to build more quality systems in our hospitals. But also utilise clever places like this super clinic. We need to give patients options to be treated closer to home in these super clinics rather than all just being admitted into hospital. So this is an issue which will see patients seen more quickly. And when you add this initiative on top of our quarter of a billion dollar blitz on elective waiting surgery, which will help a person like the lovely lady Colleen I met who had to wait a year for knee surgery and she talked to me quietly about the pain, about some of the mental challenges of having to wait for a year, the extra prescriptions that you've got to pay for in pain killers. So this is going to better care on top of a blitz on waiting lists and of course we've also announced on Sunday, just to remind people, our efforts in emergency departments. We're going to help reduce waiting times in emergency departments, half a billion dollars to do that which is going to help literally tens of thousands of people and staff. And of course we want to tackle the waiting lists for cancer treatment. Because the summary of it is that illness doesn't get cured by waiting. It gets cured by treatment and Labor's going to make health care a key choice in this election. And again you show the importance of the choice of health care in this election when you see this new report today which showed that there are dozens of Aussie millionaires who've managed to pay no tax. They've opted out of the taxation system, they pay no tax at all. So why is it that Colleen waits a year to have her knee operated on, in pain. Costly. Yet you've got dozens of millionaires running around happy as Larry and they don't pay any tax at all? It's all about choices. We are going to have better hospitals and shorter waiting lists rather than richer millionaires using tax loopholes. I would now like to invite Catherine who's been doing a really stand up job in the health policy during this election to just talk about some of the features of what we're announcing today.
 
CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks Bill. And it's so  lovely to be back here in Nowra with Fiona Phillips and of course the Illawarra, Shoalhaven team of Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones my great friends and colleagues. This $250 million we're announcing today from the $2.8 billion Better Hospitals Fund is really the piece about making sure we get better partnerships between places like this, a GP super clinic that Labor funded when we were last in office, to get that integration between hospitals, GPs and other care that's trying to keep people out of hospital but also providing hospitals with the opportunity to do care better, to make sure that we don't have people falling in hospitals, that we're getting better medication compliance in hospitals and that the sort of innovations we can get to make sure people stay safe in hospitals are important. This is all part of Labor's reform agenda for public hospitals. We want our public hospitals to be able to meet the demands of our growing populations, to help ensure that people stay safe within hospitals and that that care is provided well. This $250 million of course comes on top of the announcements we've made about improving emergency departments. $500 million to improve our emergency department care across the country and also to improve elective surgery waiting times. But also to fund activity, increasing activity in every hospital across the country. Only Labor's got a plan for our public hospitals and only Scott Morrison has got a plan for further cuts to our public hospitals.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on hospital funding you said the other day that you're working with states to deliver this funding. How, if you win on May 18, how soon after that would you call COAG and when will the hospitals actually see the money?

SHORTEN: Well we want to start working with the states straight away. So probably within our first 100 days we would want to sit down with the states to start working out how we can rescue our hospital system, how we can bring the necessary reinforcements so we can reduce the waiting lists, help people in the fight of their lives. But maybe I'll get Catherine to talk a bit more because she is a complete expert.
 
KING: So it's a first order of business for any incoming Health Minister is to negotiate the next hospital funding agreement. It's absolutely a priority and that's the work I hope to be able to undertake in government. What we know now is because of the persistent cuts under this government our hospitals are hurting now and they can't wait for this funding. So those agreements will be negotiated very quickly. It's a first order of business. But we also want to make sure that for the money that the Commonwealth puts in that we actually get reform. That's what Labor did when we were last in office. Better data for the My Hospitals website, improving, using data to improve the quality of care. They're the sorts of things that have been abandoned unfortunately by the Liberals with their complete cuts to public hospitals and their failure to actually embed reform into anything that they do when it comes to health.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten you and Mr Bowen have claimed you have a mandate for your tax increases should you win the election and expect the Senate to recognise that. Should Labor lose the election would Labor then recognise Mr Morrison's mandate for his income tax cuts?
 
SHORTEN: We've said that for the first round of tax cuts we agree. In fact one of the many reasons I hope we win is we're offering better tax cuts to 3.6 million Australians under $40,000. That first round though we've said we'd agree on. But if you're asking me will I agree to a tax cut which the government plans to implement after another election after this one where they haven't explained where they're going to get the money - I mean I can't speak about the rest of you but the nation's over playing a game of hide and seek with Mr Morrison where he hides that $77 billion number for the top tier of tax earners and we've all got to seek it. So the initial tax cuts, tick. But in terms of their unfunded tax cuts which can only be afforded after you vote twice for Liberals and they have to specify the cuts that they're going to make to pay for it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten there was a story in the newspapers this morning about your mother. Is this campaign dirtier than the last one you fought?

SHORTEN: Well, I’m going to take a little bit of time on this answer and I thank you for asking it. My mum suffered a catastrophic heart attack in her sleep on the night, sometime on the night of Saturday the 5th of April, the 6th of April 2014. So she never woke up. So, it's been about five years to last month when she passed away. I miss her every day. I sometimes, you know I get a sense of how she would react to things because she was such a strong and clever woman. But, I'm glad she wasn't here today to read that rubbish. Just rubbish. Let's go through why this is an issue. On Monday night in Q&A I was again asked about my leadership style and what drives you. I think that's a very fair question. But as part of my answer I spoke about my mother. Now I've actually spoken about my mum before. Many of you might have been here when I spoke about her on April the 26th this year at the women's policy launch. But one thing I did say about my mum and I started to explain her story. She was born in Victoria, grew up in North Melbourne, 1935, peak of the Depression. Her mum was a bookbinder. Her dad was a printer. They've even got ancestors in their family tree who were convicts. Now, I'm waiting for that to come out in the Telegraph. She came from very modest circumstances. She topped her school. She went to a Catholic convent school, the family were Irish Catholic. She got the best marks. But no one in my family had ever gone to university. She was very keen to do law. She had a great brain. But family of four, she was the oldest. They didn't have the money to pay for her tuition to go to university, so she had to take a teacher's scholarship. Not unknown. But my mum is the bravest person I've known and she would tell us the story. She'd get on the tram and go into town, go all the way to Melbourne University. What a world it must have been. Not a lot of women went to university then. Now she made every post a winner. Her two younger sisters both became nuns. They both subsequently left Holy Orders. The youngest brother, my uncle is still alive. He eventually went on to do law. I come from a great family. Mum, you know she was very brave. When she got her teacher's scholarship, I remember her youngest brother, my surviving uncle George, telling me the story. They'd go down to Station Pier, because my mum wanted to see the world. So they'd have the streamers. You know when you see the pictures of the old shipping liners setting off in the 50s? The reason why they held the streamers is the people on the wharf would hold one end of the streamer and their family on the boat. And then eventually as the ship sailed it would break. And I remember my uncle telling me as I was preparing the eulogy for my mum five years ago that he thought that she was the bravest woman he'd ever met. So she taught. She taught in government schools. She taught in London. She was exposed to the Jesuits in London. That's why she sent me to a Jesuit school. She then came back and met my dad who was a seafarer from England. And then what happened was she started teaching at university. Initially, she only had a casual contract because of course when you were a mother you didn't get the sort of maternity leave that Labor's fought for since then. Eventually, she moved from a casual contract to a fixed term, to a full contract. Do you know in the 1970s while she was raising us she did a Ph.D. full time? Sorry, she raised us, she worked full time and she did a Ph.D. Then in the 1980s when we're still at school mum enrolled in law school in her late 40s. She worked full time. She raised us. My dad was a good bloke, but let's not pretend - he worked on the waterfront, I'm not going to pretend that he would've passed the definition of modern families. You know he didn't. Nice man, but he wasn't raising us. And so in the first year that Robert and I, my twin brother, went to university, she was there. Now, I'm not saying I was breaking any records for academic achievement in my first year of university and the Telegraph doesn't have to research it, I put that out there. But mum topped the law school. She was from the education faculty, and whilst you would never want to say there's rivalry between university faculties, she was grey haired, she was 50, 51 and she topped the university at law. She got a Supreme Court prize which is the highest award you can get. And that wasn't meant to be the case, was it? You were meant to be the commercial students who had gone to the good schools. You know the young ones, the young guns. Then she eventually, she did her articles. She couldn't get articles at a law firm because you know what, as much as we love law firms, when you are an older woman in your 50s, you don't sort of look young and jazzy and you're doing your work. She had to do it at Leo Cussen Institute. Then she went to the bar. And I noticed the Telegraph said she was there for six years. I just wish some newspaper outlets would do some of their homework beyond that. She got about nine briefs in her time. It was actually a bit dispiriting. She'd wanted to do law when she was 17. She didn't get that chance. She raised kids. At 50 she backed herself. At 53 going to the bar, she got a barrister and she read from, that's the technical term, that was the apprenticeship. She did her best. She went down and did some magistrates court work. But, she discovered in her mid-50s that sometimes you're just too old. And you shouldn't be too old, but you discovered the discrimination against older women. And so she eventually, while she kept her name on the bar roll for a number of years, she came back and she did other things. Do you know that my mum wrote the book on education and law in Australia? Brilliant. She's brilliant. And that's what drives me. She went back to Monash and taught. You know, I saw a pretty bloody lazy editorial - I didn't read it all because there's only so much time in your day and you can't afford to waste it on the rubbish - said she achieved her dream. Who do some people in News Corp or some, and it's not all the journalists, I make that very clear, who do some of these lazy people think they are that because they think that I explained myself at Q&A on a Monday night that they play gotcha shit about your life story? More importantly my mum's. I've spoken about my mum at lengths. I choose to give you that last bit of the battle of her time at the bar because my mum would want me to say to older women in Australia that just because you've got grey hair, just because you didn't go to a special private school, just because you don't go to the right clubs, just because you're not part of some backslapping boy's club, doesn't mean you should give up. What I said at Q&A is what drives me. People say, Bill you know you're popular, this or that, the polls, who are you? What I did on Monday night is I explained who I am. I explained what drives me. My mum is the smartest woman I've ever known. It has never occurred to me that women are not the equal of men. It's never occurred to me that women shouldn't be able to do everything. That is why I work with strong women. That is why I believe in the equal treatment of women. But it's more than that. My parents sent me to a rich school, but we were not rich. We were not poor. We were not rich. We were like hundreds of thousands of other families. My family spent all their spare cash on educating Robert and I. We had three holidays when we were kids. Who cares? I got a quality education. But the point about it is, my mum has taught me that what matters in life isn't how rich you are or how poor you are. It's not what religion you worship. Doesn't matter who you know, what church you go to, what priest you listen to. Mum taught me it doesn't matter about your gender. It matters how hard you work. But if everyone got the same chance. Everyone deserves the same chance. I'm going to finish up Mark. My mum gave me another bit of advice. It's advice I follow. I'd go to her because she's so smart. When you've got your own Encyclopedia you'd be sometimes, long before the Internet, just go to mum. And she would never give me the free ride. She'd say, look it up. Look it up. So I'd say to whoever thought they organised a political hit on me in the election to cast some doubt - I can hear my mum now saying don't worry about that rubbish. But you might tell whoever's pulling down a six figure sum at the Daily Telegraph - look it up. Look it up. All of what I've said, is all of what has been said before. Thank you.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten have you thought about any unintended tax consequences for childcare operators under your policy to increase their workers' wages?

SHORTEN: I think that what we want to do is lift people's wages. I'll tell you the consequences of lifting the wages of early childhood educators. They're going to get paid $11,000 more over the next eight years. $11,000 more. That will mean that smart young women, and indeed men, won't have to stop being childhood educators. Another consequence, that the families, who, the mums where they go to work and their income is eaten up to pay childcare, so they can go to work, so they can pay the childcare, maybe will get out of that vicious cycle too. You know the government always says, well we can't afford to look after the wages of childcare educators. They say we can't afford to give $2,000 subsidy, per parent, per child, we can't afford to give $1,500 subsidy for the three year olds to go to kindergarten. This is a government that always says that when it comes to you that we can't afford it. But when it comes to a tax deduction for the top end, we have always got the money for that haven't we?
 
JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten, does that include superannuation, that taxpayer funded increase for childcare workers, or will that matter be footed by employers themselves?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the detail of how we work out the implementation will be done with employers, with consumer groups. But what we are doing is making room in the budget to make sure that we can improve the wages of early childhood educators. But in terms of the implementation, I remember it was a question I got asked on the day we announced it. It won't go to union members and not to non-union members. It will go to people who work in the industry. But we'll sit down with the childcare operations, the for-profits, the not-for-profits and we'll work it through. But what's really good about Labor is if you vote for Labor on May the 18th, you're going to see a significantly greater amount of support for household cost of living and the early childhood educators will have a pathway towards a better deal.
 
JOURNALIST: Sorry, isn't the problem with the childcare policy, obviously everyone wants to see low paid workers paid more, but the government is now subsidising -
 
SHORTEN: Not quite everyone, sorry.

JOURNALIST: What happens to things like aged care workers. These are very expensive areas for the government to be getting into by subsidising certain industries?
 
SHORTEN: Let's talk about subsidising industries.

JOURNALIST: Well specifically for wages.

SHORTEN: No, no, I thought your first question was on the money. Did you know that we subsidise the property industry with negative gearing subsidies? You know, that's billions of dollars. Did you know that with the diesel fuel rebate we subsidise the mining industry - and we're keeping that, before anyone says anything - but it is a subsidy. Did you know that we subsidise private health insurance in Australia north of $6 billion a year? You know, if you look around Australia, a lot of industries get subsidies. What we've chosen to do, is subsidise the workforce. As opposed to the top end. That's what it's about. Did you know we subsidise the accounting industry in Australia, when they provide professional services, doing your tax, you get a deduction on that. That is a subsidy to that industry. We don't provide other professional services that. So in terms of aged care, you're quite right. The pay is too low there. We are not proposing to use this particular mechanism in aged care. There is going to be a royal commission, let's see what can be done. We have already outlined other measures in aged care. But when it comes to wages more generally in this country, we are going to reverse the cuts to penalty rates, we are going to shut down sham contracting, we are going to reform the dodgy use of 457 visas, we are going to make sure that labour hire workers get a better deal in this country.
 
JOURNALIST: Last time you were here, I think it was four days before the 2016 election, and you said that Fiona was an outstanding candidate, and that you'd - that a Labor government would deliver better Medicare, better schools, and better funding for the Gilmore electorate.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you.
 
JOURNALIST: Clearly the polls said then that locals didn't buy it, why should they this time?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, I've got to know Fiona better. Secondly, the sitting Liberal member is gone, and haven't the Liberal Party been divided down here in Gilmore? They brought a ring-in from - is it Roseville? From Roseville. They split three different ways. You've got poor old Grant Schultz who was the man, now no longer the man. You've got the Nats sticking their bib in to see if they could shark a vote or two. So one big difference is the division on their side.  And I don't think that's - that's just a matter of record - everyone in Australia knows where Gilmore is now, it just seems to have a dysfunctional Liberal-National family here. The second thing is, of course, we've even honed our policy offerings more since then. You know, one of the big ones is the Pac Highway of course, but another one is $35 million for inpatient treatment at the local hospital. Our policies have got better, Fiona Phillips is even better. And we're much more united. I mean the other thing I'll say in 2016, is then you voted for Malcolm Turnbull and got Scott Morrison. If you vote for Scott Morrison this time do you get Pauline Hanson, Clive Palmer? It's a real sort of surprise lucky dip isn't it?
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, there are a number of protests taking place, led by surfers here in Gilmore, who oppose drilling in the Bight, what's Labor's stance on the matter?
 
SHORTEN: It's a good question. There is a company who is doing some test drilling in the Bight. If I form a government one of my first decisions will be to get an oil spill study. I want to understand the consequences of an oil spill in the Bight. This is a new development. No one has said that, but that's what we're going to do if we form a government. We want to understand, what are the consequences, and I think that's what's concerning a lot of surfers and people who care about our coastline.

JOURNALIST: Just in relation to waiting lists, I mean everyone likes the idea of reducing waiting lists, but $250 million is not a big amount of money in the scheme of things, for the health budget. So how much would $250 million reduce waiting lists by?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I'll get Catherine to supplement the answer, but I just want to add a couple of numbers onto your $250 million to re-assure you. First of all, our $500 million investment into emergency departments will reduce waiting lists there. Our $500 million in cancer treatment to reduce waiting lists there, so in fact it's well north of a billion dollars, but why don't I let Catherine.
 
KING: Again, what we did when we were last in government, and this is the thing that you know, the Liberals do every time, is they cut. There was a national partnership agreement on hospital improvement and it had the NEAT and NEST targets in it. Now they're a bit technical, but basically they were targets to get waiting lists down. Now we've deliberately spent money on capital which is helping patients get out of hospital, so we've announced money for palliative care, for sub-acute facilities, to get people out of the acute hospital area, and to improve patient flow. And what we've done with the NEAT and NEST targets when we were last in government was they drove a downward trend in waiting times and in the waiting times for elective surgery. We've got some work to do with the states and territories and with the hospital sector about how we actually get that, but it's that sort of work that will drive those waiting lists down.

SHORTEN: I just want to just finish up and say thank you for being patient with the answer about my mum. As you can see, I love her dearly and it was actually very nice of you to give me the chance to talk about her again. And for that, I appreciate you very much today. I won't always say that.

JOURNALIST: Yeah, sorry Mr. Shorten, just another health question, we’ve obviously seen announcements here in the Shoalhaven for hospital funding, what about smaller hospitals like Milton and Moruya, are they on Labor's radar as well, and will they benefit from some of this funding?
 
KING: We've obviously made a number of announcements, obviously the one here at Shoalhaven. We've made an announcement about, recently in Stephen's electorate as well, and in Eurobodalla as well. But under Labor's $2.8 billion hospital plan every single hospital in the country will receive additional funds for the activity they undertake in their hospitals.

ENDS

LIBBY COKER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CORANGAMITE: …here in Corangamite with Bill Shorten our leader and also with the Premier of Victoria, Daniel Andrews. I would also like to acknowledge Richard Marles the local member for Corio and our great Labor team. We have some exceptionally exciting announcements for you today and I would now like to introduce Bill our leader to make that announcement for you.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Libby. That was Libby Coker, Labor's candidate in Corangamite. Labor's really pleased, as part of our ongoing commitment to make healthcare and proper funding for hospitals one of the number one issues in this election. We are really pleased to announce that we will provide $40 million extra for Baxter House Hospital and working in partnership with Premier Dan Andrews, as only federal Labor will be able to do, $50 million to create the first Women's and Children's Hospital in Geelong. And in addition as part of our rolling out of our campaign to make sure that we assist Australians in the fight of their lives with cancer, we are going to provide an extra $15 million to Torquay Community Hospital. I congratulate Libby Coker on her advocacy for making sure that hospitals in Corangamite, and of course Richard Marles in Corio, hospitals in the Geelong region get proper funding. You can only offer to guarantee the best possible support for health and hospitals because Labor's not going to give $77 billion to the top tier of tax earners and we do not support a multi-billion dollar tax cut for big corporations including multinationals. As the election reaches its last 12 and 11 days it's very clear that there is a stark choice in this election. Better hospitals or bigger tax cuts for multinationals. I would now like to hand over to Premier Dan Andrews to talk further about the exciting partnership to give Victorians the best possible healthcare.
 
DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA:  Thanks very much Bill and thanks very much to the team at Deakin for having us along today. This is a fantastic announcement. It is a real partnership to provide even better care to the growing number of patients who need that care close to home, close to family and friends. And at the lowest price, whether that be in terms of time away from family or indeed  hip pocket costs. To think that under a Shorten Labor government we will have not only Geelong's first ever dedicated Women's and Children's Hospital but also a dedicated elective surgery centre. That is fantastic news. And I'll tell you, that certainly beats the six years of cutbacks that Victorian patients have had to endure under the current government. This is a great day for the people of Geelong, the Bellarine, the Surf Coast. It's a fantastic example of what can be achieved when you fund health properly. That's all about putting patients first. Conversely if you cut hospital funding you hurt patients. This is a fantastic announcement. I know that when you think about the growth we've seen down here in this local community we're going to go from about  2,500 babies born a year at Geelong Hospital to more than 4,000 because of the investments that Bill has just announced. And in terms of elective surgery, we know how frustrating it is for people to have to wait longer than they should for the care that they need. This $40 million investment, a dedicated, first time ever, dedicated elective surgery centre will mean that the number of people who can get day surgery in Geelong will go from 5,500 to 11,000. That sure beats cutting hospital funding. This is a real partnership to deliver real care. And I'm delighted, proud in fact to stand here with Bill Shorten who knows and understands that if you invest in health you can achieve great things. If you cut health funding though you hurt patients. Bill Shorten understands that. He's the only one that does.

SHORTEN: Talking about babies being born I would just, should record Chloe and my and my family's congratulations to the Sussexs on the arrival of a little baby boy and as I have wisely done, I have consulted with Chloe and we'll be sending a little present. Bronwyn Bancroft, who is a very famous Australian Indigenous artist, she writes great books for children so we're going to send little baby Sussex some great Australian children’s literature. Over to you.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten we have seen an incident today with the Prime Minister and an attempting egging. I would like to get your reaction to that and also have you had your personal security threatened during the campaign?
 
SHORTEN: Let me be very clear. This is appalling and disgraceful behaviour. In Australia we have violence-free elections. People are allowed to protest peacefully but anything approaching violence is completely unacceptable. If this protester thinks that she will get sympathy or support from me she couldn't be more wrong. In terms of people making threats and vile comments, it can happen from time to time. But this is completely unacceptable and the Prime Minister has my complete sympathy and, of course, the lady who got knocked down in the process.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Morrison took to twitter immediately afterwards to link it to what he said are militant unions. Can I get your response to that message from the Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: I get that it was a very upsetting experience for him, I'm not going to judge. I think I do need to reiterate though, this is not what we do in Australia. We are not one of those countries. This is not what we do. It doesn't matter if you are the extreme left or the extreme right or indeed in between. This appalling and disgraceful behaviour. No sympathy or support. This is not what we do in Australia.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you support the Greens' call to have a codified racial vilification law to suppress the media and in particular to apply to media commentators?
 
SHORTEN: I haven't heard about that at all so I can't add any ...
 
JOURNALIST: Richard Di Natale spoke about it in a speech last year and it was again in the media this week with his comments.
 
SHORTEN: You follow Richard Di Natale more carefully than I do.
 
JOURNALIST: What will it mean today if interest rates are cut?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the Reserve Bank of Australia is independent and they need to make that decision free of any pressure from anyone in politics. I mean, it is a bit of a wicked situation for them, isn't it? On one hand, everyone knows the economy is wallowing in mediocrity but on the other hand it is 10 or 11 days before an election so anything they do will be viewed you know through that political pressure. I'm going to leave it to them. But one thing I do know, and I don't need the RBA to tell us this, is that everything has been going up except people's wages. We are at zero per cent inflation, a million Aussies are doing two jobs or more just to make ends meet. This economy is not firing on all cylinders. It is a problem for Australia.
 
JOURNALIST: How would you ram your tax reforms through the Senate when the prospective crossbench plans to torpedo them.
 
SHORTEN: Get as many people as possible to vote Labor at the election.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you think it is stupid to cost your climate policy, following your comments last night on Q&A? Surely the taxpayers want to know the cost of what your climate change policy is going to be.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I didn't mean any offence to anyone in this matter, but let's be blunt. The idea that you can have a debate about the cost of taking action on climate change without taking cost of the inaction on climate change is only looking at half the puzzle isn't it. It's like taking one piece of the jigsaw and pretending it's the whole puzzle.
 
JOURNALIST: How much would your 45 per cent emissions reduction target cost the Australian economy, if you could just answer the question?
 
SHORTEN: My view hasn't changed on that question from last night to today. You know, Australians are fed up with people getting the wrong end of the telescope and turning it into a microscope on the cost of taking action on climate change. Australians know, they know - sorry, can I have the chance to finish your question. Australians know that politics is broken in this country because we don't take action on climate change. Plenty of companies, large companies, you may have shares in them, I don't know, are already decarbonising. They are reducing their carbon pollution. I have seen with my own eyes the solar wind farms of big industrial operations without which if they hadn't made that investment, which you might call a cost but smart companies call an investment, we wouldn't see these factories and these plants still being opened.
 
JOURNALIST: Just to follow on that question though, you are saying there will be no costing number put on your climate change policies before the election?
 
SHORTEN: Richard, let's go through it. I understand the interest of The Australian in the question so let's be up front. Cost to taxpayer: much more expensive under the government. You would probably know that they are spending $3 billion-plus over the next 15 years just to pay big polluters not to pollute. That's much more than we are proposing. We're proposing to provide some money, $300 million, to help the energy intensive, trade exposed sector - aluminium, cement, steel - cope with change. But that is far less for the taxpayer than the current government. Then we look at the cost to the environment. There is no debate. I don't even think the most extreme right-wing climate deniers – well I guess they do, but most other people recognise there is a cost to environmental inaction. It is happening every day. In terms of businesses, smart businesses are already investing in change. This country, the politics is broken. We have got a government who is dragging its feet. If you really, really think there is a cost to taking action on climate change then why have two million Australian households already invested in solar? They understand, we understand, most thinking people understand action on climate is important.
 
JOURNALIST: I am from the Wall Street Journal, can I quickly ask two issues: Labor has apparently written to Tencent, the owner of WeChat, about messages circulating in Chisholm. I just wondered, what is your concern there? Are you worried it is really denting your chances in that seat amongst Chinese Australians? And secondly the US is preparing to unveil a new policy towards the Pacific with new bases to be built in Micronesia. You spoke last night about more nuance in foreign policy but I am just wondering how much sharper you think the choices are facing Australia.
 
SHORTEN: It is great to have the Wall Street Journal here and it is even greater to have my foreign affairs spokesperson here. So why don’t I give Penny a run on these issues.
 
WONG: Can I first respond on the WeChat issue. There are very serious and concerning reports, deeply concerning reports, about fake news, malicious content being circulated on the Chinese media platform WeChat. What is even more concerning is reports of those being linked to the Liberal Party. So our message to the Prime Minister is this: this is not what we do in Australia. We have robust political debates. We don't have major political parties engaging in fake news on this media platform or any other media platform. So it is incumbent upon Scott Morrison to rule out any Liberal Party involvement in the malicious false content that is circulating on WeChat. We had foreign interference laws which passed our parliament not that long ago. And we did that because we want to ensure there is no interference in Australia’s election, that our democracy remains sovereign. Well, the Prime Minister needs to make sure that his party does the right thing. In relation to the various discussions, both on trade policy but also on the Pacific, we have already announced, Bill announced at the Lowy Institute our support for and our intention to make the Pacific front and centre in Labor's foreign policy and certainly that is the way we will approach it. We will continue to work with the US on constructive engagement in the region.
 
JOURNALIST: One million people have voted in pre-polling and some within your party have expressed concern that perhaps the time pre-polling has been open is too long. Do you share those views and would you look at the issue after the election?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think a range of politicians across the spectrum, including Josh Frydenberg, Anthony, Kerryn Phelps have expressed some views about the intense pre-poll activity. We can review these things after an election but my focus is on the election, my focus is on explaining to people the value of voting for Labor. I personally think one of the themes which is leading to the early pre-poll activity is a mood for change. People have had a look at the fact that Scott Morrison voted ten times to introduce business tax cuts. He spoke on 205 times, I'm informed, on the benefit of business tax cuts. He has only not put in the business tax cuts for the top end of town, for the big businesses, because Labor and the crossbench blocked him. He's never once said it was a bad idea, he's never once declared it was the wrong thing to do, and with all of his deals with Clive Palmer I have no doubt that if Scott Morrison was to be reelected, this would be right up the top of the list for him to do. Quick as a flash, back in there, trying to argue the case for $80 billion worth of tax cuts for big business. And I have to say, when we are down in Geelong, and you can see the vision of thousands of extra patients being able to get medical care in their own community, a Women and Children's hospital working with the Victorian government, radiation treatment available on the surf coast. The choice is as clear as day and night. A vote for Labor is for better hospitals, a vote for the current mob is a vote for more tax cuts for multinationals.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, obviously the RBA will make its interest rate decision later today, you have said you are due to release your costings later on this week, will the RBA's rate decision, if its a cut, alter the timing, or the costings of your policies.

SHORTEN: Well first of all we will release our costings at the end of this week and so all will be revealed then. In terms of the RBA cut, I don't want to make this press conference so long that in fact they make the announcement whilst we are here. We will have to I think wait and see. It is a wicked problem for the RBA isn't it? We all know this economy is going backwards, we know there is a torpor, a malaise in the economy under the current bunch.
 
JOURNALIST: But will it affect your costings?

SHORTEN: Well we will find out on Friday, let's see what the Reserve Bank does. One thing I can say is that we are committed to funding healthcare in this country. We are committed to reversing the cuts to hospitals. We are committed to making sure that our Medicare system is not only safe from the government but is improved under a Labor administration. We can make these promises for better healthcare and better hospitals because we are not giving $77 billion away to the top end tax earners and we are never going to give $80 billion away to big business.

JOURNALIST: On Eliza's question, it's a real issue I know you say you want people to vote for Labor but nobody expects Labor to have an overwhelming majority in the Senate after this election, it's a half-senate election. I'm sorry if that's a shock for you, but the crossbench will still control the balance of power. Nobody respects mandates in the Australian parliament these days, least of all the Senate and you know that. So what is your message to these Senate crossbenchers who are saying on the record they will block the main parts of your program to fund all these promises you’re making? Or do you have a plan B?

SHORTEN: What I would say first of all to Australians is let's not have three more years of minority parties controlling the Senate. I'd say to Australians if you're sick of the last six years, three Liberal Prime Ministers, five defence ministers in six years, 13 energy policies, 23 reshuffles, if you're sick of the chaos, if you're not excited by the idea that you voted for Tony Abbott and got Malcolm Turnbull, you voted for Malcolm Turnbull and got Scott Morrison, and you vote for Scott Morrison and you get Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson calling the shots, vote Labor at the next election. Beyond that, I'm not so quick as you Mark to dismiss the concept of mandate. I think even our harshest critics would say that we're putting our policies out there first. So I do believe we will have a mandate and I'm a very determined person. I don't think the Australian people want to see multinationals treating Australian tax laws as a doormat, wiping their feet as they head off to the Cayman Islands, especially with Australian health assets. I don't think the Australian people think that tax cuts for the top end are more important than getting vital health care in Australia. Thanks everybody.

ENDS

DIANNE BEAMER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LINDSAY: Back in 1997 when I was a state member around here we opened an oncology unit at Nepean Hospital, and that was a great boon for people in this area. We needed something that was local, something that was Nepean. But years later it is no longer fit for purpose. And I have been talking to doctors and to patients and a doctor told me that if you get a diagnosis there and you need a bit of quiet space in which to talk to your family, perhaps regroup, that quiet space here is the footpath. And it isn't good enough. I am so grateful here today and the people of this region I know will be so grateful here today for this announcement. I am just going to make it short and say I am absolutely astounded that you're all here to cheer on what is going to be one of the fantastic things for Nepean Hospital. And let me introduce you of course to Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: That's Di Beamer, full of energy and looking forward to being the next Member for Lindsay if she is elected on May 18. Good afternoon everybody and welcome to Sydney's western suburbs. Great to be here and great to be here announcing $125 million to assist in the cancer treatment, to assist in better services for the population of the mighty outer western suburbs of Sydney. In many ways today's announcement highlights the issues in this election. Nepean Hospital has had $5.7 million cut from it. Nepean Hospital has outgrown its current facilities and needs new investment, not cuts. So Labor because we have made a decision to put patients first, to put tax subsidies for millionaires last, we are in a position where we can make real change. It was pretty inspirational to meet Sandy and Kim in the scanning, in the diagnostic imaging centre we have just been to. Just a little bit of a story on Sandy. Sandy got through a battle with breast cancer then got diagnosed with pancreatic cancer five years ago. Pancreatic cancer is bad. It's survivor rates are very low. She is a remarkably strong woman supported by her very impressive and loving husband Kim, three kids, 18, 21, 23. But for their teenage years their mum has been in the battle of their life. What we heard from a real person, living in the real world, is that their out of pocket costs of fighting cancer have been over $100,000. This isn't the way Australia should be. What we need is real change. We need to make sure the Nepean Hospital gets the investment it deserves. That Sandy and Kim in the fight of their lives get the support they deserve. We are going to put $2.5 million into the Hawkesbury Hospital emergency department to upgrade that. This is what this election is about. I spoke to a really marvellous nurse, Louise Maher before and I said how do you do it? For 30 years she has been a nurse looking after people diagnosed with cancer. She said we put patients first. That's what I want to put to you in the last two weeks of the election. One of the key issues is it's all about the choices. We are going to put patients first and we are going to put tax subsidies for millionaires last. Now also as we talk about infrastructure we are joined by Anthony Albanese who is here to announce further infrastructure investment for the mighty western suburbs of Sydney.
 
ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well thanks very much Bill and Di and Susan Templeman. It would be great to see Di Beamer back in the parliament. She was a fantastic representative in the state parliament and will be even better in the national parliament. It's great to have my friend running here. Can I say that today we're announcing $50 million for planning work for the outer orbital, the M9. We know that there is massive congestion on Sydney's roads, particularly in western Sydney. We also know that what we need to do is to get planning ahead of need. This is a great example which is why Infrastructure Australia recommended this as a priority project. $50 million will ensure that you can have proper community consultation so that it's got right. So that the community through local government can actually have that input into the route and into issues which inevitably will be raised, because this is a challenge to build a road in areas that are already subject to development. But if we get that planning right now it will be far easier than if we go and retrospectively after the housing is built there to go back and try and build this outer orbital that will be so essential not just for western Sydney, but will also link up with the Central Coast and with the Illawarra. It will take congestion out of the centre of Sydney as well as being good for western Sydney. This follows the other announcements that we've made. The $3 billion commitment to North-South rail from the Western Line here up through Rouse Hill but down to Badgerys Creek airport and to the Macarthur region. It follows the $3 billion commitment to Metro West which has not been matched by the government. We want also for that to be stage 1 and Stage 2 to be planning to extend that Metro. Good in itself but also taking pressure off the congested main Western passenger line. We also have commitments today we've announced Blacktown City, one of the largest councils in Australia, 370,000 people that's been excluded from the Western Sydney City deal. We'll  include them and we'll have genuine regional partnership across this sector. We've announced our support for the third crossing of the Hawkesbury. We've announced park and ride facilities, I must say a year before the government decided that this was necessary in their most recent budget. We've announced a pipeline to Western Sydney airport so that we will take trucks off the road rather than having fuel taken to that airport on trucks travelling through Sydney's suburbs. Our commitment to Western Sydney through infrastructure is to get it right, is to work with local communities. We will invest. For too long there's been a failure to invest in our outer suburbs of our cities. Labor will do just that.
 
SHORTEN: Thanks, Albo. Are there any questions?
 
JOURNALIST: On your announcement today, $125 million in six years time which is half the capital costs of building this centre. It's a good thing for the area, but isn't there a critical need now in cancer units like this for additional funding? They're overrun, their demand is high, their ability to deal with the patient load is insufficient. Don't they need a funding injection within six years, like straight away?
 
SHORTEN: Spot on, Mark. I think you've gone to the heart of this election in one question. That's why Labor's going to put back $14 million into the hospital here. That's immediate. What we're going to do with that $14 million is help make sure there are more nurses and more doctors. Because of Susan Templeman's lobbying, we're going to make sure that the emergency department at the Hawkesbury Hospital can take more people which will lead to less pressure on Nepean Hospital. That all happens straight away. But it doesn't just stop there. Elections are about choices. The government chooses to give billions of dollars right now to the top end of town, to welfare for the well-off. I choose to spend some of that money instead on providing scans and support for bulk billing, for visits to the oncologist, right now. Let's not forget that on Budget Reply night, I outlined the most ambitious policy to start funding assistance for cancer treatment right now. There's are a very clear choice and, Mark, your question goes to the nub of it. There is a crisis now. Only Labor is prioritising putting money on the table to help with the out of pockets. So when the voters strip away all the ads and all the negativity and all of the stuff that's going on, there's very simple choices. One in two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer in their life. Out of pocket costs are expensive. To be honest, I was surprised when, within 10 minutes, the current Prime Minister sneered at our cancer proposal. He said it's all free if you go through the public system. No, it's not. We're talking to the survivors. It's not. But what's more is then they said we couldn't afford it. Always remember that politics is about choices. When Mr Morrison says he can't afford to help people in the fight of their lives now, or he can't afford to put back the money into Nepean Hospital, he's made a choice. He just didn't choose the patients. He chose instead to defend unsustainable and indefensible subsidies for the top end.
 
JOURNALIST: Former Prime Minister Paul Keating yesterday described the nation's spy chiefs as nutters. He said that they're setting the foreign policy for Australia and damaging our relationship with China. Do you share any of those concerns? What would an incoming Labor government do in terms of those leading our security agencies?
 
SHORTEN: Well, no, I don't share those concerns. Paul Keating's an elder statesman of Australian politics. He's never been shy of saying what he thinks. But for myself and for my Opposition team, we've worked very well with the national security agencies. They know that and we know that. And we of course will continue to take the professional advice of the people who help keep Australians safe.
 
JOURNALIST: How do you ensure the states spend this $500 million reducing hospital wait times? Will there be some sort of benchmark or target set?
 
SHORTEN: Absolutely. What we will do is we'll put more money on the table to the states. Just to explain to people who are patients or waiting for elective surgery. What happens is that currently Canberra, the national government to whom the lion's share of taxes are paid, they're only paying 45 per cent of the key hospital costs. Whereas we think that Canberra, because of its significant, they're wealthier than the states, should help provide additional so they should pay 50 per cent. We'll sit down and do partnership arrangements with the states. A lot of our announcements are guided by the best advice of state experts right now.
 
JOURNALIST: Was former Prime Minister Paul Keating wrong then? This is a man who you have said you take great advice from. He's a man you said you listen to. Is he wrong when he says the security agencies are filled with nutters?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I don't share that view. I do not share that view. Having said that I thought some of his other characterisations perhaps were more pertinent. But not on national security.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you feel disheartened, does it shatter your confidence that your personal approval rating is going down with Australian voters and what more can you do to turn that around?
 
SHORTEN: No I don't and I don't share the view. Listen, for 2,030 days I've lead a united team in the good days and the bad days, when the polls are good and when they're not so good. I've learnt very early on in this job not to comment on the polls. We're all going to find out in 13 days who wins the election. What I actually think Australians want is not for us to talk about ourselves, they want us to talk about the people. There's a real choice at this election. Very simply, vote for real change. End the chaos in Canberra. Vote Labor.

JOURNALIST: Medical professionals have raised concerns about Labor's transgender policy, that your National Centre and your Sexual Orientation Commissioner could influence GPs on how they provide advice - do you respect that opinion?

SHORTEN: No, I just think that's rubbish. That is not our approach. That is a rubbish story and no doubt the government will help, be fuelling it. Can we just get back to what is important. We have heard this government run all sorts of desperate smokescreens, camouflage and what have you. I tell you what I'm interested in. I'm interested in the fact Sandy and Kim have had to pay $100,000 out of their own pocket to get cancer care. That might not concern the government. It concerns me. There's a real choice at this election. For me it's not about those sort of rubbish stuff which emerges from the fringes. What concerns me is that Australians in the fight of their life have to face the chance of going poor when they fight cancer. It's pretty straightforward, isn't it? Cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on the small businesses ..(inaudible) ... can you explain why you've scaled that to keep with the policy the 2016 election? The small business sector is concerned about red tape and compliance in hiring these people. What sort of assurances can you offer that it won't be particularly burdensome and it is worth their while to do this?
 
SHORTEN: My word it's worth their while. I was pleased to see the Council of Small Business Associations, you quoted part of what he said, but there was something else he said. He said he thought this was a good idea. They want to make sure they don't want to get tied up in red tape. That is fair enough. But, there is a real problem in Australia. And, you can see it any Saturday when you go to the shopping centres or indeed when I do my town hall meetings. I frequently run into very well presented, very hard-working older Australians. But, you know, they have been on the rough end of economic change. They have lost their job. But, we have a problem in Australia, don't we? That once you're 55 and 60, the old economic job market can be pretty harsh for no other reason than you're older. I run into people all the time who have got their CVs, they have got 30 or 40 years of work experience. They don't get an even go. This is a real problem. This is not a confected issue. For people in this age group, they spend twice as long on the unemployment queue. So, what I want to do is use a little bit of incentive to help small business, perhaps give an older person a go. I mean, let us call it for what it is. We are a bit quick in this modern age just to write-off the experience of older people. So I think it is a good initiative. We are mindful of the issue of red tape. We won't get bogged down in that. But, do you know what happens right now to older people? They get sent to job interviews which are not appropriate, you know, just so the job provider can tick-a-box and get a grant of money. We are actually fair dinkum. In terms of compared to 2016, which was the other part of your question. Don't ignore the Australian Investment Guarantee. That is a $3.3 billion baby which is great for business. Did you know that if you invest, if we get elected that is, if you spend more than $20,000 investing in new technology,  which is productive, which is on a depreciation schedule, we are going to give you 20 per cent upfront extra. What that means is if you buy a, you know, a $100,000 unit for your factory or for your business, extra 20 per cent can be written off day one. That means you get money back for your investment. It's estimated that this will enhance wages and it will enhance employment. So if you look, Andrew, rather than just cherry picking one program which we announced, which is a good one all on its own, and you put together, you bulk up, what we are doing. We are actually doing more for small business than the government.

JOURNALIST: Given your faith in the Labor Government's ability to work well with national security agencies, would there be any change at all in Australia's attitude or foreign approach in China?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I gave my Lowy address, I don't blame anyone if they haven't refreshed themselves lately on it. But what I said there is that when it comes, parking aside the fact we are going to we are going to work with our national security agencies - and I reckon I have had had more briefings in Opposition than when the Liberals were in Opposition from the national security agencies because we take it seriously. But with China, obviously we have to mind our national security interests. There is a debate which says we shouldn't look at the rise of China solely through the prism of strategic risk. You know, China buys a lot of our materials. What we will be is, we will put Australia's interests first. And we will mind the security, we will also make sure that we try and gain the best deal I can for Australian jobs, Australian exports, dealing with China and other Asian economies.
 
JOURNALIST: Who is going to be your Home Affairs Minister if you are elected? Don't Australians need to know and have confidence of the person that is going to be in charge of our security agencies?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I think it would be premature of me to declare victory in this election, so I won't. We will have a Home Affairs Department. We have announced some of our positions, but will finalise it when we see who gets elected and doesn't. But, you know, I noticed old Peter Dutton stuck his head up here, came out of witness protection briefly. Sort of reminds me about the Liberal launch. I mean, Mr Morrison is going to have it in Melbourne. I just wonder who is going to be there. I have got my whole team at my launch. Will we see the Minister for Environment? Will she make, she is more on the endangered species list than the ones we're trying to protect, will she be there? And, as for Peter Dutton, he is the one who famously said you can't go and have dinner in Melbourne. So, he might be too scared to have dinner in Melbourne. Will he be too scared to turn up to the launch?
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Dutton said he wants a debate at the National Press Club with one of your, with your next Home Affairs Minister. Will you stump somebody up for that?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I'm glad you went to that. I might, Anthony has been struggling to find someone to debate him. I think Michael McCormack is your opposite number. But, you know, as for debates, I might just let Anthony talk about the difficulty of finding Coalition ministers.

ALBANESE: Look, we in Bill's team have been quite happy to have debates, and indeed, I've written to Michael McCormack, I've sent text messages, I've sent smoke signals, to try and find him, and he can't be found. I mean, he's the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, he's in charge of infrastructure, but I can't find him to have a debate. We proposed at one stage the National Press Club this Friday and apparently there's now problems with that. I anticipate that the problems will dissolve on about May 19 and he'll be prepared to have a discussion. But it goes down to what the Coalition, what the government's attitude is towards debates in general. I mean, you've been travelling in these travelling parties for a few weeks and for a couple of weeks they were saying this bloke didn't want to debate their bloke. Bill didn't want to debate Scott. That wasn't true. We were negotiating all of that through. What we know now is that Scott Morrison basically got creamed by Bill Shorten in the two debates that have been held. Creamed, absolutely. One nil, then two nil. There were going to be three rounds. When you're two nil behind, you maybe concede. But he should have further debates. There's been some agreement about the National Press Club. But the question is, why is Scott Morrison chicken to go on Q&A? Why won't he go on a program that goes for an hour, where you have questions from a host, questions from the audience, in a - it's a tough gig doing Q&A for an hour. He's not prepared to do it. He should do it. He should stop running scared, because if he went on Q&A and broke out of the egg and went on, what he might get asked is where is the $77 billion coming from?
 
JOURNALIST: That's what he was asked on Sky New with the exact same format?
 
ALBANESE: With due respect, not everyone has Sky News. With due respect. Have a look at Q&A, and the ratings that Q&A get on a Monday night, compared with - I've got to tell you, Sky News on a Friday night. I'm sure is very good. I don't know because the footy is on and that's what I'm watching. I'm watching the footy on Friday night. I'm sure they were good. He should do Q&A and he should do it, he should commit to do it, because they advertise it tonight, they advertise what's on next week. He should just do it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten will you pull out of Wednesday's debate because you're not happy with the format?

SHORTEN: What? We're the ones who wanted Wednesday's debate. Let me just -  hang on a sec. We wrote to the other people, the Liberals, six days ago. You know they've just sort of, there's been some movement in the bush and they've materialised and said, "OK, if we have to we'll do it." I'm not going to pull out of any debate.

JOURNALIST: So there will be a debate on Wednesday night?
 
SHORTEN: That's what I hope. But the other thing is, I'm going on Q&A tonight. See, we don't need to go to Liberal Party, invitation-only events to answer questions. Anyway, look, we'll go on Q&A, happy to do Leigh Sales a couple of times, you know, we'll do our chats.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you get Mr. Albanese to debate Mr. Dutton on National Security?
 
SHORTEN: Listen -

ALBANESE: I want to debate my counterpart.
 
SHORTEN: Listen, let's be clear. Peter Dutton had a debate with Ali France and that didn't end up so well. Peter Dutton doesn't pick my team line-up, and I'll just go back to where we started here. Mr Dutton may be feeling the pressure in his seat. That's not my problem. I'll tell you what is my problem, and I'll finish up this press conference on this point. My problem is that this government is pretending they can't afford to do more for Nepean Hospital. This government is pretending that they can't do more to help cancer patients with out of pocket treatment. This government is pretending that they can't afford to help three million pensioners with the cost of their dental care. When they tell Australians they can't afford to do more on healthcare, what they're actually telling Australians is that they don't deserve it. This election is about a choice. It's 13 days until the election, it's about a very clear choice. For us, it's about prioritising Australian hospitals, Australian patients, Australian healthcare, over providing thousands of dollars in tax cuts to the top end of town, or looking after property investors, or going soft on multinationals.

JOURNALIST: Paul Keating said there would be a dramatic shift in relations with China under Labor. Do you share that view, and what about Yang Hengjun who has been detained since February without seeing his lawyer. Do you think China should be giving him access to his lawyer.
 
SHORTEN: I don't think it's fair of you to conflate Mr Keating's comments with that second matter, which is very concerning. Not everything is an argument between us and the Government, especially on national security. It is very concerning about the detention of this person. We support the efforts of the government. We've had some briefings on it. But I would just say for this man, I wouldn't necessarily conflate it into the election cycle, because we're about looking after this fellow, aren't we? Thanks everybody, see you a bit later.
 
ENDS

DAVID KOCH: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins me from Sydney this morning after last night’s ALP launch. Bill Shorten thanks for joining us.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning David.

KOCH: Look you've splashed billions on promises. You have won- been judged to win the last two debates. Why don't people like you in terms of the preferred Prime Minister vote?

SHORTEN: I don't accept that people don't like me or our policies. But I've made a rule for over 2,000 days while I've led a stable and united Labor Party that I am not going to comment about polls. I've only got another 13 days to go so I'm not about to break that now. But I think when you look at the key issues in the election David, the issue is do you want more of the same or is it time for real change? Do we want more chaos, more cuts to services or do we want to see real action on wages, cost of living and of course climate change by a united team?

KOCH: Alright. You can say that, you can say you ignore it. But look, it seems as though the more people see you the more they don't like you. What don't people get about you? What are the areas that they're missing? Last night Chloe Shorten, Mr Shorten was a real star of the show having to explain what a nice bloke you are.

SHORTEN: Well I think Chloe was excellent yesterday-

KOCH: Yeah, I agree.

SHORTEN: And I was really pleased that she spoke. She doesn't seek the political limelight but I thought that was – I was just wrapped.

KOCH: Is that a reflection though that you need her to come out and convince the Australian public that that you are a decent bloke, that you're not able to do it yourself.

SHORTEN: Well David, when you do appearances with Libby I don't think that you're not a decent person. But I think Libby presents another side of you. I think there's nothing wrong at all. And let's go to the heart of the matter, what you're getting at. Labor's leading on the policy debate in this country. You know, we have put forward policies on how we pay for our promises. This country cannot go on with more of the same. You and I both know that the economy is in the freezer, wages are stagnating, the cost of childcare- there will be plenty of people watching the show this morning, you know two income families where the second person, generally the mum, is practically just working to pay for the childcare. Did you know David, that we're proposing a $2,000 subsidy per child per year? We can do this because we're winding back unsustainable loopholes. I think I’ve got the right message for the times.

KOCH: Another big question is how are you going to pay for it all? Come on give us the facts and figures. I've done a bit on the back of an envelope, you're going to save $5 billion on stopping the franking credit cash rebates. That's not quite enough. Where's the rest of the money coming from?

SHORTEN: Well we've said that we want multinationals to pay their fair share. I announced yesterday- actually- a new scheme to stop some multinationals treating the Australian tax system as a doormat which they wipe their boots on coming in and out of Australia. We've also said that we want to wind back unsustainable negative gearing where we're giving taxpayer money to property investors who make a loss on their fifth and sixth investment property. So we can explain it. The other thing which we're not going to do is – it's a matter of priorities – Mr Morrison is proposing to spend $77 billion out of the Budget to give a tax cut to the top end of town. We know he's got his personal pet passion project which is giving $80 billion to big corporations. So by me not spending money on the very top end I can help fund the emergency wards around New South Wales for example. I can help fund pensioner dental. No one ever talks about pensioners in elections.

KOCH: That's fair enough. All right Bill Shorten thanks for joining us.

SHORTEN: Thank you.

ENDS

It seems as though the more I see David Koch I don’t like him.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. Fantastic to be at Australia Zoo and for me, to be able on Saturday during the election campaign, to take Rupert and Clementine with me to see and meet some of the fantastic animals here, it is just a real treat. But it is really great to be here at Australia Zoo, because Labor can announce today three new initiatives to help protect Australia's environment. Labor has outlined a billion dollars of extra support to protect our precious environment. See, I just do not want my children to come and see our flora and fauna. I want their children to be able to come and see it, and future generations to see what makes Australia so special: our environment. Today we are announcing that we are going to do more to protect our beaches from erosion. We are going to do more to protect our endangered animal species. I think most Australians would be surprised to learn that when it comes to the rate of animal extinctions, we are fourth worst in the world. We need to do more. So a Labor government, if elected on May 18, will make sure that we can do more to protect the habitats of our wallabies and our bandicoots, species of these animals, and our flora and fauna to make sure that we can do more to keep our environment and protect our native species. So more support for community groups to protect beaches from coastal erosion, more support for our endangered animals, and I think in a very exciting development, highlighting Labor's commitment to being the party of the environment, we are going to overhaul our national environmental laws and we are going to put a new cop on the beat. Both to make sure that decisions are made in a timely fashion, which is good for jobs, but also make sure that we have got the strongest possible environmental laws. When you look at today's exciting pro-environment announcements and you add it on top of our commitment to help rescue the reef, our commitment to tackle the scourge of plastics in our waterways, our commitment to revitalise Australia's riverways, you realise that Labor has got a great plan to protect our environment. Of course, as we saw, we are the only party with a fair dinkum plan on climate change. But today, it is about the zoo and seeing some of Australia’s precious fauna and I am very excited that Labor is investing so much to preserve our environment, so that future generations get to see what we get to see now. I am happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: If you win government, would you consider following the UK parliament's lead and declaring a climate emergency?

SHORTEN: Well first things first, I do think that climate change is a most serious issue. We have got to win the election. I think last night 's debate revealed that this government has no plan on climate change. What we want to do is take us to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. Now, last night I thought it was very revealing in the debate, when pressed, when the Prime Minister could no longer hide, he had to admit through gritted teeth, that actually our carbon pollution is increasing. When Tony Abbott came in it was about 512 megatons of carbon pollution into the environment. Now it has gone up to 541 megatons and the trajectory is up, not down. Australians are crying out for action on climate change. Business as usual just doesn’t cut it. If you want to see the nation act on climate change, vote Labor at the next election.

JOURNALIST: Was the space invaders moment a 'Mark Latham moment' for Scott Morrison?

SHORTEN: Well, I was right in the middle of it all. I thought he was clearly under pressure, but I could not see from the TV viewers' perspective so I might ask Kristina Keneally to give her perspective, as one of the audience.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thanks, Bill. First of all let me say, to borrow a basketball analogy, last night Bill Shorten had nothing but net, he shot the lights out, whereas Scott Morrison, quite frankly, fouled out by the third quarter and got a technical for unsportsmanlike conduct to boot. Last night, we saw the real Scott Morrison. Not the knockabout bloke, not the daggy dad, but someone who is arrogant, aggressive and, quite frankly, desperate. Scott Morrison came to the debate last night, not with any policy or vision, though he did have his Mark Latham moment. Bill came with real action on climate change and he has got his stable, united team around him. Last night, Scott Morrison had little more than his arrogance and his climate change denialism. He also had his aggression. Quite frankly, it wasn’t pretty. His space invader moves? They were not pretty at all.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten, should Malarndirri McCarthy have spent more than $100,000 of taxpayer money on flights to Sydney and more than 100 nights in the city when she was not travelling for sitting weeks? Is the explanation is that she was there for personal business like medical treatment acceptable?

SHORTEN: She has self-referred herself to the Parliamentary Expenses Authority, which is the right course of action. We will see what they say.

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten, do you think it is appropriate that your candidate for Durack thinks refugees should go back to where they came from, and people on welfare should just get a job?

SHORTEN: I have not seen her comments, so I can’t add anything to it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that she should be disendorsed, though?

SHORTEN: Well, if I have not seen her comments, then I cannot comment on them.

JOURNALIST: Well, why have you not seen them? They were sent to the Labor Party yesterday.

SHORTEN: I have not seen them.

JOURNALIST: You have talked about chaos and dysfunction in the Coalition, but doesn't Peter Dutton today coming out and saying that, win or lose, Scott Morrison should be the leader void your argument?

SHORTEN: Is that what he said? Listen, if they are already trying to work out their leadership instability now, it just shows the chaos in this government. Peter Dutton, there is a name we have not heard, we have not seen him lot in the national media since he made his disgraceful outburst targeting Ali France's disability. Ali France lost the lower part of her leg pushing her own child out of the way of an oncoming car which had lost control. All we have had from Dutton since then is a very graceless apology, and we have not seen him since. I did not know he was there last night, I understand Kristina saw him. So maybe she could add to this.

KENEALLY: I did see Peter Dutton last night. He was let out of whatever underground bunker the Liberals are keeping him in and allowed to appear on Sky News in the daytime, so there you go. What we have seen today, in relation to Mr Dutton, is evidence that, in Dickson, Liberal volunteers are handing out how to votes for Clive Palmer. It is not enough that Scott Morrison is doing dirty deals with Clive Palmer, now Liberal volunteers for Peter Dutton are doing Clive Palmer's dirty work. They are handing out his how to votes there in Dickson. This is the length, the desperation, that Scott Morrison and the Liberals will go to in order to cling on to power. Doing these desperate deals with extremist right-wing parties and now having Liberal volunteers involved actively in handing out how to votes for Clive Palmer.

JOURNALIST: On the environment, you talk about endangered species becoming extinct. Are you concerned about the black-throated finch up in the Adani, and the Galilee?

SHORTEN: I think that is a different set of issues, isn’t it. I make no apology for the fact that Labor wants to slow down the rate of extinction of animals, of birds, of mammals, of our flora. I think most Australians would be shocked to discover that the rate of extension of species that we are the fourth worst in the world. I think what we're doing today is a really good initiative and I really think it goes down to a deeper theme in this political election. Do you really want more of the same? Do we really want business as usual on the environment, on climate change, on cost of living? Or do we want a hand on a better deal. The reason that I got into politics is to hand on a better deal to those who come after us, than what we inherited from those who came before. Now, this is not the only issue in the election, I get that, the preservation of species of animals is not going to decide the fate of an election, but it is a sign, just like we have comprehensive environmental policies, that Labor is thinking about the future of this country and if we want a better future for this country, more of the same and a tax cut for the top end, that's not a plan for the future, that's just a recipe for more chaos.

JOURNALIST: I just wanted to ask - today the AEC has told us that 660,000 people have already voted.

SHORTEN: Alright, okay. Yes.

JOURNALIST: And that there's still another two weeks to go, to the election. Do you think that pre-polls should be tightened, that it should only potentially be a week before the election, rather than three weeks before the election?

SHORTEN: Listen, I think that people look for more convenience in their voting. Australians lead busy lives, and if you have a chance to vote ahead of the Saturday, if it increases participation in our system, I'm all for it. It is a big number. Four percent of Australia has already voted. I think that is unprecedented. I guess that is because people are looking for the convenience of voting early, but perhaps amongst all the other explanations, there is a mood for change. Wherever I go in Australia, people ask why can't you and politics just get on with the climate change debate, just get on and fix it, get on and act. I saw the West Australian today had a big front page where people were saying just get on and do it. I just want to say to Australians who are impatient with the broken political system that we have right now, if you vote Labor, we will get on with real action on climate change. To those Australians, say who are pensioners, who are frustrated because they're like one of the 145,000 Australians on waiting lists for dental care - if you vote for Labor we will just get on with it and let you have some say over your own dental health, rather than just forgetting about you and just worrying about a tax cut for the top end of town.

JOURNALIST: On the Liberal volunteers who have been spotted handing out Clive Palmer how to vote cards - do you want the electoral commission to intervene? Because this isn't the first time this has happened.

SHORTEN: Well, I think there is something pathetically desperate about the current government, isn't there? They're rushing around tying up coalition deals with Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. I mean, Mr. Morrison, when he was the treasurer, didn't have a good word to say about Clive Palmer. Now he's a beleaguered Prime Minister, Clive Palmer can do no wrong. That is not the way to do business in this country. My concern is if the Liberals were to scrape home, they are a risk to the stability of the nation, because Scott Morrison has sold the soul of the Liberal and National Party and put it in the hands of Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. This is a recipe for chaos. One sentiment I get right across Australia, doesn't matter if you're Liberal, Labor whatever, people say, can you guys just end the chaos? My team is talented, my team is stable, and I am offering Australians a vision for a better Australia. I am recommending a vote for change in this election, because the pensioners should not be kept waiting to get their teeth looked after, because a million Australians households shouldn't be battling just to pay childcare, and they should get some support. Because people expect us to take action on climate change, and when you are in the fight of your life dealing with cancer, the government should be finding some money to help you with your out of pocket costs, not shoving $77 billion out of the budget in a ram raid to give the top tier of tax earners in this country.

JOURNALIST: Why are you happy to respond to -

SHORTEN: I promise you, I've said to you I'll come to you.

JOURNALIST: Why didn't Labor step in earlier with the candidate Luke Creasey, to consider dis-endorsing him, when the first posts emerged, and are you worried about the impression it will leave on voters?

SHORTEN: Well, when the very first post that he shared emerged, we said it was stupid, it was wrong, it was reprehensible, there were no excuses, but then it was clear that there would be not just one post, and there were more, and I was not going to keep defending the situation, full stop.

JOURNALIST: Why are you happy to respond to -

KEANEALLY: Can I respond to that as well? What we have seen from Mr. Morrison is a new standard, right? Mr. Morrison got up and said, it did not matter how long ago Luke Creasey's posts were, it did not matter whether or not he had apologised, that it made him unfit for public office, making those sorts of comments. Now, if that is Mr. Morrison's new standard, the question needs to be asked, what is Mr. Morrison going to do about John Alexander? John Alexander made despicable jokes, I'm not going to repeat here, about rape. Sure, it was 22 years ago, and he apologised, but he did it on film. This is Mr. Morrison's standard now. It doesn't matter how long ago, it doesn't matter how young you were, it doesn't matter whether you say sorry, you're unfit. If this is the Scott Morrison standard, I think it needs to be put on Scott Morrison, how is it that John Alexander gets to contest Bennelong, but somehow Luke Creasey's apology is not good enough? That is Mr. Morrison's standard, and Mr. Morrison risks being called a hypocrite, if he is applying one standard to a Labor candidate, and a different standard to a Liberal candidate. Can I also say, Mr Morrison has been out there saying, the standard you walk past is the standard you accept. What about the Liberal candidate for Scullin? Is Mr Morrison really willing to walk past, and accept, as a standard, that it is okay to equate same-sex marriage to paedophilia? I cannot imagine a more repugnant view for a candidate to hold, than to say that same-sex couples, people who have entered into a marriage, a loving relationship, who are raising children, who are families in our communities, who have been granted under the law the right to marry, for a Liberal candidate to stand in front of the public and say that is equatable to paedophilia is disgusting, and that is the standard that Mr. Morrison is walking past when he fails to act on the Liberal candidate for Scullin.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten, why are you  happy to respond to comments Peter Dutton has made, that you say you were not aware of, but you were sent questions about the candidate for Durack yesterday and you haven't got across that yet, you don't want to respond to that, because you're not across it?

SHORTEN: Actually, I responded to the comments Peter Dutton made, two and a half weeks ago about Ali France. I didn't respond to his comments that he made yesterday, other than what you put to me. So it's different. But if we want to talk about Peter Dutton, it just reminds you of the chaos of the Liberal Party. Let's be honest, they're already working out who leads the opposition. For me, why don't they ever just talk about the people? I mean they do a lot of brainpower into working out how to pretend their liberal supporters are Clive Palmer supporters to hand out their how to vote cards, they spend an inordinate amount of time talking about us. I mean the debate on your TV station was only twelve or fourteen hours ago, sixteen hours ago, and we learn a couple of significant things in that debate, didn't we? We learnt that Mr. Morrison has a $77 billion tax cut for the top tax earners in Australia, but he won't admit it, and what's worse is he won't even explain how he is going to pay for it. I think he let the cat out of the bag on a couple of significant issues. He has banged on about costings, why is he so scared to admit he is taking $77 billion or thereabouts, out of the national budget to give it to the top tax earners. And of course, he gave one of the silliest answers a politician has given in the history of the Commonwealth, when I said to him, if you take all this money, for your fictitious tax cuts, out of the budget, what is it you won't be spending money on, and he said - these tax cuts don't have a cost. Oh, rubbish, rubbish, rubbish. His plan, is to give tax cuts to the top end, $77 billion dollars. A millionaire, in Mr. Morrison's world is going to get an $11,000 tax cut, someone on $40,000 is getting $11 a week, that is his priorities, and how does he pay for that? He pays for it by cuts.

I look forward to seeing you at our next engagement everyone.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask one issue?

SHORTEN: Tim, I haven't given you one question so.

JOURNALIST: When Scott Morrison got into your personal space last night, as you clearly believe he did, do you think that was a tactical ploy to knock you off your balance or it was Scott Morrison, the bloke, that's who he is?

SHORTEN: Oh listen, I clearly thought he was under pressure. I don't know what he was thinking, when he did it, but I have had a lot of people respond and say they would prefer to see their prime ministers and opposition leaders, keep your cool at all times.

ENDS

JOSH BURNS, CANDIDATE FOR MACNAMARA: Welcome everyone. Well we're on the site of Anzac station, a beautiful sight here in the heart of Macnamara. It's very nice to be joined here by the Leader of the Opposition Bill Shorten, Brendan O'Connor and of course the Premier of Victoria Daniel Andrews and the Minister for Transport Infrastructure Jacinta Allan. I'm Josh Burns, I'm the Labor candidate for Macnamara and this project is so important for people in my electorate, because it's going to run a train line right through the heart of it to connect people from Caulfield all the way up to the Parkville precinct to real jobs, real transport infrastructure. The Labor Government that's gotten things done in Victoria to partner with a federal Labor government that will get things done right across this country. So with that I'm going to let Bill Shorten say a few words.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks. Josh Burns, Labor's candidate in Macnamara. Here we are at the site of Anzac railway station. What an exciting vision for Melbourne and for Victoria to have the single biggest public transport infrastructure investment ever. And federal Labor is really excited to be using our support to work with Dan Andrews in Victoria to give Melbourne a world-class underground railway system. Melbourne really needs greater assistance in infrastructure. Did you know that under the current Liberal government with all of their cuts and chaos Melbourne has been cheated and Victoria has been cheated of a fair share of national infrastructure? Under the current government, infrastructure expenditure in Victoria has fallen to as low as 7 per cent, so 7 cents in every national dollar, go into Victoria at its lowest point. But federal Labor's going to change that. We want to see our big cities receiving public transport investment. So we're going to put forward $2 billion in our first budget to assist with the timely execution of this remarkable project. Below our feet two massive tunnels will be drilled. 7,000 people employed. All of this in a zone with the world's busiest tram corridor happening right around us. This will literally mean for people in Melbourne, for tens of thousands of people on the railway lines fanning out right across the massive Melbourne footprint, there'll be more places on trains. This city is going to hum a lot better. This is what federal Labor wants to do. We want to have real change. No more cuts and chaos of a divided government. We're the party of the future in this election, not the party of the past. We're the party who wants to see Australia have world class public transport to help be a congestion buster for our big cities. We will work with Dan Andrews. We will work with Annastacia Palaszczuk. We will work with Mark McGowan. And we'll work with other state premiers because Labor believes that if we've got better public transport that's good for jobs, that's good for liveability. It means more time at home with a family. I'd now like to hand over to Dan Andrews to say a few more words about this exciting partnership - a vision for Melbourne in the 2020s and the 2030s.

DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: Thanks very much Bill. Thanks everyone for being here. This is the biggest public transport project in our state's history. And what you've just seen Bill Shorten announce as part of his positive and optimistic plan, that's what a real partnership looks like. A real partnership with a real project and real money. Money provided over the next four years. Not money that's on the never never for projects that haven't been planned even. This is a real partnership with real money to deliver a real project. This is fantastic news for Victorians. Fantastic news for those 7,000 workers and their families. Fantastic news for every single Victorian because essentially by taking the busiest train line out of the current city loop that's great for people that are on that Cranbourne Pakenham line and the Sunbury line, but it's also great news for every other person who uses train services across the state because it creates additional capacity in the current city loop. This is a project that has been rated by Infrastructure Australia as the number one project and yet we have no support from the current federal government. The contrast is very clear. And I want to thank Bill Shorten on behalf of all Victorians for a positive plan, an optimistic plan, one that is real. A real partnership to get things done with real money delivering real projects. That's a real difference between the alternative government and the government that we've been experiencing these last six years. I think we're happy to take any questions you've got now.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) funded as you've already said on your website, why is this money needed?
 
ANDREWS: Well I've always said and you've heard me say many, many times that if you've got a real partnership with a Commonwealth government you can do more and you can do better. Now we've already got the biggest infrastructure agenda in the nation's history underway right here now. But we're having to do so much of it on our own. And that's the key difference and that's what's at stake in the election on May 18. Do we keep doing these things on our own where Victoria doesn't get what it's entitled to? Or do we have a real partnership with a Shorten Labor government that actually cares to invest and to get things done.

JOURNALIST: At the election campaign you hammered the Greens and said they had a toxic culture when it comes to women. But you have a candidate in Melbourne who has made jokes about rape. How is that acceptable that he remains to contest this election and not be disendorsed?

ANDREWS: I'll let Bill speak to that first and I am happy to speak after him on that.

SHORTEN: I think you're right that the candidate's remarks which were made were deeply offensive. I'm not going to defend the remarks, they were shocking and stupid. But he's also come forward and said he was 22 at the time, seven years ago. He is mortified as he should be. He doesn't want to cause any embarrassment and he doesn't hold those views now. So he has apologised deeply and he certainly doesn't hold those views now.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

SHORTEN: I agree. Stupid is stupid is stupid. I'm not here giving the bloke a pat on the back. But let's go to what the real contrast here is. The Liberals have just been forced to dump another one of their extreme right wing candidates.
 
JOURNALIST: But they did dump their candidate Mr Shorten, and Premier Andrews -

SHORTEN: Yeah hang on. Greg I'm going to do the courtesy of finishing a question. You will get your go.

JOURNALIST: The question is why you won't disendorse -

SHORTEN: Yeah I understand the question. What I'm saying is that this Jessica Whelan, she said what she believes now. She said what she believes now and it reflects on what she thinks now. What our fellow said was, he said it seven years ago when he was 22 and he's clearly regretted and apologised for it. He understands. He doesn't think that now, he certainly doesn't think it at all, he understands that. The Liberal candidate, not only were these contemporary remarks but then they tried to cover it up. They didn't put their hand up and say, no this is wrong. They said, we got a conspiracy theory of hackers. Federal police were going to be called in. So the way that they've tried to cover it up reflects very poorly on the Liberal party.

JOURNALIST: Mr Andrews in the state election this was a real tactic that you guys used in trawling through Facebook accounts, bringing up historic things the Greens candidates said. You came to the conclusion that they had a toxic culture problem with women and now for the bloke in your faction it seems to be okay. Why?

ANDREWS: Well it's not okay. And he himself has made that very clear. So I'll just be very clear with you, he's -

JOURNALIST: How can you support him remaining a candidate?

ANDREWS: What he has said and what is most important here is that he shouldn't have said what was said. He shouldn't have posted, he shouldn't have associated himself with those views. That was wrong. The difference here is he's owned it. He's made an apology and I believe him to be sincere in the apology that he has made.

JOURNALIST: Is the nuts and bolts of it that you're running a protection racket for one of your own faction members.

ANDREWS: Well no, that's not right.

JOURNALIST: Are you not disendorsing him because if you do the Greens will put their resources into other seats in Melbourne.

ANDREWS: Well, be clear about this. He's made comments. He's associated himself with subject matter that's completely wrong. He's owned that. He's apologised. I believe his apology is sincere. That sits in stark contrast to the culture of contemporary extremism that seems to be taking over the Liberal and National parties. I think the Prime Minister's in town today and I for one as a proud Victorian would like to know exactly, I want answers to those questions about whether that United Patriots Front fellow Erikson was engaged by the Prime Minister, these are the allegations, to interfere in the Victorian election last year. I think we're entitled to those answers. We're also entitled when people make a mistake, they stand up, they admit to it, they apologise and they're sincere in that. And that's exactly what the candidate for Melbourne has done in stark contrast with many others.

JOURNALIST: Why isn't Luke Creasey here when these tunnels run through Melbourne.

SHORTEN: This is actually the seat of Macnamara.

JOURNALIST: But the train line goes through Melbourne.

SHORTEN: The train line goes through the whole of Victoria, why don't I have every Victorian Labor person here. Come on, fair's fair.

JOURNALIST: Wages are growing at 2.3 per cent. What would be the acceptable wage growth figure for Labor, would it be 3 per cent, would it be 4 per cent. Can you guarantee wages under a Labor government would be higher. Secondly what role did Sam Dastyari and the private equity firm have in influencing your $200 million funding for pathology.

SHORTEN: Well let's talk about wages. Well I'll do the second issue. What Labor's done is we've decided that after seven years we want to increase the bulk billing incentives to pathology to stop pathology from having to decrease its bulk billing. Now this is a government who loves to complain when Labor chooses to spend more money on health. You know this is a government that will always find an excuse to tell you that they can't afford your health care bills. We take a different view. When the government says that we can't afford to spend on health what they're actually telling Australians is you don't deserve better funding for health. So if you have a look at the policies we've outlined, be it helping keep pathology bulk billing at high numbers, that's what we do. That's what Labor does. After seven years, due for an increase. But it's not just that. When it comes to Medicare and helping people in the fight of their lives with cancer the government said it's free. How out of touch is the government? You know cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor. We want to look after pensioners. Did you know that we're going to give a new Medicare item which will provide up to a thousand dollars every two years for pensioners to help with their dental care. Now the government says they can't afford that. But they can afford to give tens of billions of dollars away to big business and tax cuts, they can afford to give tens of billions of dollars away to property investors, they can afford to give tens of billions of dollars away in loopholes. This is a government who just doesn't think that the people of Australia deserve proper health care. In terms of wages. Big problem in Australia under the last six years of the Liberal government is that everything has gone up except the wages. And in many sectors you've had penalty rate cuts. We've seen the early childhood educators underpaid for the work that they do. We see a lot of abuse of casual labour, abuse of 457 visas. So we think we can get wages moving. I'll tell you I will do better than the government. Because this government while it's been in power has presided over record low wages growth. And the problem is that if you've got record low wages growth that has a chilling effect on the economy. It's like putting the economy in the fridge and chilling it. We've got no growth going on. As a result zero percent inflation. It means that businesses are doing it hard. Everyone knows that three more years of this current government's cuts and chaos means that everyday Australians fall behind the pace. So be it wages or health care we are the party you should vote for. Vote Labor on May the 18th if you want better help with your health care. Vote Labor on May the 18th if you want to get your wages moving. Vote Labor on May the 18th if you think that three million pensioners and seniors health card holders deserve a fair go. Vote Labor as well if you're one of a million Australian households whose income is less than $175,000 because we're going to provide you between $1,500 and $2,000 in additional subsidy for every child.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten your costings are central to the debate in this campaign. Cynics would say: "Oh yeah well he'll release his costings in the last few days to minimise scrutiny on them as much as he possibly can." Can you please be clear with us exactly when we will see your full campaign costings.
 
SHORTEN: We will release our costings towards the end of next week.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on Kevin Rudd, he's been doing a lot of work in Chinese electorates all around the country. Is there a potential deal for him to get a foreign posting if you are elected as prime minister?

SHORTEN: No there isn't, but Kevin Rudd is like the whole Labor tribe. They've all united because they know this government's got to go. On May the 18th people have got a choice and Labor is making the case for change. If you want to have, you know the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison-Palmer-Hanson government, that's what you're getting if this government get re-elected. This government hasn't made the case to give them a third chance. All this government's delivered you is the promise of a tax cut on the never never which can only be funded by massive cuts to schools and hospitals. Their record is one of looking after the very wealthy and doing nothing else for anyone else. If you look at the $14 billion worth of cuts to schools, the $700 million cuts to hospitals, 400,000 pensioners having their pensions cut or losing the pension altogether, this is a government which only thinks about the top end of town, whereas we are making the case for change today and every day up to the election. If you want real action on climate change, vote Labor. If you are one of three million pensioners who worry about how you pay for your dental care, vote Labor. If you're one of a million working households in this country under $175,000 and you'd like to get a subsidy between $1,500 and $2,100 per child, vote Labor. If you are sick of not getting a wage rise but corporate profits go up and up and up and up and up, vote Labor on May the 18th. As for Kevin Rudd campaigning, that's good, because we need to combat the Liberal lie machine in the Chinese community which is just lying every day, making up stories about a million refugees in the next 10 years or making up stories about Safe Schools. The Liberal Party is actually offering Australians nothing at this election. If you want to ask the Liberals what they're going to do for Australia in the next three years all they'll do is complain about us. If you ask us what we're going to do for Australians in the next three years we've got lots of good plans for middle and working class families.

JOURNALIST: Catherine King yesterday said that she would not rule out reducing the private health insurance rebate pending a Productivity Commission review. Would you rule it out?

SHORTEN: We have no plans to lower the private health insurance rebate, but what we do have is a plan to cap the fee increases. One of the big problems is that the private health insurers have been calling the shots within the Liberal government. I mean the Liberal government's never seen a bunch of vested interests, top end of town rent seekers that they don't give into, lie over and let them tickle them on the belly. Private health insurance premiums have been increasing too much under the Liberals, so you know we're going to do? We're doing what this government's too gutless to do. We're going to stand up to the big private health insurers. We are saying, you cannot under a Labor government for the next two years increase private health insurance premiums more than 2 per cent. So we are going to introduce fair dinkum price control because we are the party of working people in this country. I don't want to see private health insurance becoming a luxury item which only the super rich can afford. We're going to rescue private health insurance by a bit of tough love.

JOURNALIST: In last month's budget the Federal Government's showed an undercut. Can you promise people who are on the NDIS that you will not cut any funding?
 
SHORTEN: Yes I can. I'm going to do a forum, it's a day of action for people with disability and their carers at Moonee Valley racecourse so you'll hear what I'm going to do there. But, the short answer is we are going to make sure that the Liberals $1.6 billion cuts can't be repeated. What a lazy government. They can't get multinationals to pay their fair share of tax in Australia but they can make sure that poor people who need wheelchairs have to wait two years for a wheelchair. It speaks volumes. On May the 18th, if you know a family who are carers or people with disabilities, vote Labor, because when it comes to looking after people with disabilities in this country, that's more important to me than getting a tick from a vested interest property group or a vested interest private health insurance group or a bank.

JOURNALIST: Does this money help cover the fairly drastic shortfall in stamp duty revenue and had Mr Shorten told you it was coming before you postponed the budget?

ANDREWS: No, no. We are very pleased to welcome this announcement today. This is a very significant demonstration I think of what a real partnership looks like, a real partnership, a real project and real money. Coming to Victoria, if Bill is successful, in the next four years. Not in 14 years - the next four years. That's really, really significant and sits in stark contrast with the current government. What this will mean is that instead of having to build these massive infrastructure projects on our own, we'll have a proper partner, a real partner. And that just means that we'll be able to do more and do better. The good thing about this is this is not an announcement for one budget in one year. This is consistent support over the next four years and that's what a real partnership looks like. This is a fantastic day for Victoria.

JOURNALIST: Over a billion dollars of East West Link money?
 
ANDREWS: Well there's a couple of weeks to go in the election.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, does this mean the East West Link is dead under a Federal Labor Government? Given that money's been so-called put aside by the current Government.

SHORTEN: You and I know when the government says it's been put aside and it never gets to Victoria, that's a cut. I know where Melbourne is. I know where Victoria is. I've lived here for 50 years. I've caught the Dandenong line. I understand this is a cracker of a project, but I don't think the Victorian taxpayer should have to carry, to do all the heavy lifting on their own. When you vote Labor on May the 18th in the national elections we will make sure that public transport in our cities gets some love. Ever since Tony Abbott's time, this government, the national Liberals have been very, very shy about investing in public transport in the cities. Some of the other money we're using though is our fantastic South East roads package which is north of a billion dollars. So we're going to help people who live out in Berwick, who live out in the new suburbs in the south east to make sure that congestion, they don't get ignored just as the housing estates have developed. We want to make sure they've got quality roads to go with the quality of lifestyle they want. On the East West, we all know that there has been two state elections. Dan's put the case to the Australian people. And I've been over on the west side of Melbourne. There's plenty of work going on. If you want, if public transport and roads are what you vote on in elections you would vote Labor. Have a look at the suburban rail loop, the airport rail link, Melbourne Metro, the roads package in south eastern Melbourne, plus what we're doing in the northern suburbs of Melbourne. You know Melbourne and Victoria, if they care about roads and rail should be voting Labor because we've got a positive vision.Thanks everybody.

ENDS

JUSTINE KEAY, MEMBER FOR BRADDON: Hi everyone, welcome to Burnie and thank you for having us here at Direct Edge manufacturing. It's great to have Bill Shorten here again he knows the roads of Braddon very very well, Tanya Pilbersek and Mark Butler here in the beautiful northwest.  We're sorry about the weather, it's normally quite more beautiful than this. This announcement today is extraordinarily important to me, it's very very personal. The reason I got into politics and wanted to represent my community was because of my children, to make sure that they had opportunities for great training and education here. For working opportunities as well. What we're announcing today is really harnessing what we have so much of and that's our natural renewable energy resource to create numerous jobs. Thousands of direct and indirect jobs here in the north west coast. Really boosting the local economy here, not just for this region but for the whole state. So I'm very excited by about this announcement. I've been working with a number of proponents around renewable energy here in the north west and this is the vision that we so desperately need here from the north west coast for the future of my children and the future other children and people's grandchildren here in this beautiful part of the world. So I'll pass over to Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Justine. Good morning everybody. Australia needs a change of government. This country can't keep going along as we are without taking real action on climate change. We see the power prices going up and up. We're missing out on renewable jobs of the future and we're squibbing the hard decisions to give a better environment to our kids. So today's announcement is all about further investment by Labor into real action on climate change and we want to prepare for the workforce of the future. We're going to invest in more renewable energy jobs with the skills. As I walked around this very clever workshop seeing the bespoke work which is being done here, answering manufacturing challenges here and also exporting to other countries. Courageous companies like this and hard working workforces and families in north and north west Tassie need a government as innovative, as bold and as focused on the future. This company is getting ahead because it's thinking about the future not the past. But this company deserves a government in Canberra who's thinking about the future not the past. Climate change is one of the big issues in this election. We've got to get our power prices down. We've got to start training our young people and not so young people to grab the job opportunities of the future that renewable energy provides. And for goodness sakes, the future generations aren't going to forgive the current crop of politicians if we don't take real action on climate change right now. I'd like to hand over to Mark Butler to talk a little bit more about a couple of our announcements, then let's talk some more.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: Thank you Bill. Thank you Justine. Justine has been such a fantastic advocate of renewable energy policies in our caucus because she understands that the north west of Tasmania has some of the best wind energy resources on the face of the planet and will benefit so greatly from Labor's ambitious 50 per cent renewable energy target. We've announced that the first renewable energy zone under a Shorten Labor government would be the north west of Tasmania. We've also announced today a $5 million down payment on the project Renewable Future which will see an extraordinary ecosystem around renewable energy built in this part of Tasmania, tapping into the hydrogen industry potential of this state as well as more traditional wind energy. Also as Justine said we've got a plan to train young people for future jobs in renewable energy with the announcement of 10,000 funded apprenticeship places today to train our budding electricians of the future into renewable energy. But I want to make a very clear point about Scott Morrison's alternative. Because there are two very exciting projects in Tasmania that tap into the renewable energy future. The first is project Marinus, a second interconnector to the mainland and the second is the Battery of the Nation project, expanding Tasmania's extraordinary pumped hydro resources. But those two projects, it's been made very clear in the feasibility studies, only stack up in what the feasibility studies describe as a high emissions reduction scenario which is consistent with Labor's 50 per cent renewable energy target. Scott Morrison has to stop lying to the people of Tasmania. These projects will not go ahead under his policy of building new coal fired power stations let alone his budding coalition partner Clive Palmer's policies of building nuclear power stations which was announced this morning. The only way Tasmania has a really significant part in the energy future of Australia is under an ambitious renewable energy target policy like the one Bill Shorten is putting to the people in this election campaign.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on today's announcement Brian Fisher has modelled the economic cost of your climate change policy. Between $260 and $540 billion. If you say that's wrong why don't you provide your own costings then?
 
SHORTEN: Will you know this fellow and his report remind me of the doctors that the big tobacco companies used to roll out in the 70s and 80s to say that smoking was healthy for you. We will file this report under P for propaganda. It's full of wrong assumptions. But there's a deeper issue here and I'll get Mark to supplement in a moment. When are we finally going to put the genie of the scare campaign back in the bottle on climate change? Australian politics is broken because we haven't actually dealt with climate change properly. Carbon pollution is increasing under this government. The report itself - and I haven't read it but I've seen the initial observations of it - it actually says they haven't modelled the impact of climate change and not doing anything. This is such a flagrantly dishonest debate at the moment. We are very committed to taking real action on climate change. We don't believe the scary numbers. We think they're just rubbish. And also who paid for this report? I don't know if you’ve found out, but who actually paid for this report? Was it right wing think tank the Menzies Research Centre who has current Liberal MPs on the board, former Liberal MPs on the board, former heads of the Business Council and the Mining Council and mining interests? What Sydney businessmen have helped contribute to pay for this report? When you get a report like this you've always got to ask yourself who paid for it? And is this for politics or is it about climate change? I might get Mike to talk a bit further.

BUTLER: Well thanks Bill. This is a campaign to hijack a reasonable debate about climate change being led by people like Mr Fisher. This is a complete crock of rubbish, this modelling, by a fellow who has spent 20 years building a career fighting every single climate policy, including indeed the climate policy proposed by John Howard. John Howard was too much of a pinko leftie for this fellow, Brian Fisher. We're seeing assumption after assumption completely discredited in this modelling. For example, his costs of carbon abatement are 2,000 per cent higher than the cost Scott Morrison's own government is paying now. The costs of energy storage are 400 per cent higher than the cost Snowy Hydro has achieved in a very big tender very recently - costs which everyone in the industry says are going to come down in the future. He models increases in the electricity price but the electricity sector is not even covered by this policy. Look this guy has form. He has never met a climate policy he didn't want to tear down because he simply doesn't believe in climate action. It's a discredited piece of rubbish. It shouldn't be paid any attention to and instead more serious pieces of analysis like Citibank's which says that even for the 250 businesses covered by this policy the costs will be immaterial and manageable. The macroeconomic impacts modelled by Warwick McKibbin. They're the sorts of pieces of analysis that should guide this debate. And we should then talk about the things that 10 million households want to talk about. Cutting their energy bills through the National Energy Guarantee by $550. Cutting their energy bills by 60 to 80 per cent if they can tap into Labor's household batteries program. Cutting their bills at the bowser by more than $500 according to Scott Morrison's own modelling if we just get a more efficient fleet of light vehicles. That's the debate people in Australia want to have. How are we going to discharge our responsibilities for our children while also cutting household bills.

JOURNALIST: Whether you believe the figures that are in the report or not doesn't it show that the numbers can still be crunched and it's not actually impossible to get a figure?
 
SHORTEN: It shows that if you write a fairy tale you'll get a report for this Government on climate change and I just don't believe it. We've got to call out the scare campaigns. We've got to call out - ask yourself, and I say to Australians who hear the scary numbers coming from private vested interest commissioned reports, why do these people want you not to take action on climate change? What are they so scared of? You know you want to hear some real modelling, come with me to Sun Metal in Townsville where they've got a solar farm which is helping provide cheap energy, which keeps the refinery going. Come with me to Whyalla and see the solar farm there which is powering 3,000 houses. If you want to see the real lived experience taking action on climate change, next time you'll land in a plane over the suburbs of Australia have a look and count the number of houses where you see solar panels on the roof. People, we've got to call out the superstition. We've got to call out the fear. The problem is that this government after six years is incapable of lowering your energy prices and incapable of doing anything on climate change. They're split down the middle. We see the tendrils of influence of the right wing extremists within the Liberal Party and the National Party. For whatever reason they've got them stuck in the cul de sac of history. They don't want to move on climate change. But it wouldn't matter except they're the Government of Australia. The reason why families are paying more in electricity prices right now because this government can't move forward on energy policy. The reason why we're handing on a more polluted environment to our kids is because this government can't change its ways. We need real change in Australia. We need to get the energy prices down. We need to unlock the potential of this company and 10,000 companies like it to export to the rest of the world. We need to do more on climate change. Here's a prediction and I think it makes pretty good sense. Three more years of this government like the last six, it'll be even more expensive to fix up the damage of climate change in three years if we don't start now.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten you implore Australians to accept the outcome of experts with regard to whether the Adani mine should go ahead or not. You now have an expert giving a mixed finding on your climate plan and you tipping a bucket on them from a great height. Why shouldn't Australians conclude you're cherry picking you experts?

SHORTEN: No. No, no, no Tim, wrong. First of all,  I'll tell you who's on our side of the ledger. Just about every scientist in the world. APRA, the RBA, Citibank. Citibank is not a nest of communists although the way this government's going they probably will call them that soon. They have to write a note for the market, for their clients. It has to be up to an ASX level of compliance. Citibank doesn't have any skin in the game whether Liberal or Labor win the next election. It's not a biased, you know opinion for rent that we're seeing in this latest report. They're just telling it straight. And again let me return to the lived experience of Australians. What we've seen in the last six years under the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government is we're seeing power prices have gone up. That's just a fact. You don't need an expert. Just go and ask anyone who pays electricity in this country. Now it would be the triumph of hope over experience to give these climate denying cave dwellers another three years in business when they clearly failed in the last six years. Labor's got a real choice for change. When people go and vote between now and the election on May the 18th, there is a real choice. If you're happy that your power bills are going up, if you're happy that nothing's happening on climate change except more carbon is being polluted, if you're happy to miss out on renewable energy jobs then you probably like more of the same. But if you think that politics is broken, if you think the climate deniers need a good kick up the back pants, just a good kick up the backside to just get on and do something, vote Labor at the next election.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten I spoke to a couple of the audience members after the debate on Monday. They were undecided over the costs of your climate policies. So by not releasing your own modelling are you willing to lose voters over it?

SHORTEN: No, I don't think we will actually. I think more people - and I was at the debate too - I think more people actually were unhappy that the government is not advocating anything serious on climate change. Now I get that in the election - and this is why you in the media play such an important role interpreting what you hear, reporting what you hear - I get that the government is trying to, is doing a cyclonic scare campaign on climate change. But I actually think the people of Australia are a bit over being told to be scared of the future. If this government finds the future too hard they should get out of the way and have a government who is not scared of the future. The reality is the single greatest reason why energy prices have gone up in Australia is there's just a lack of energy policy. And anyone who thinks this government after 13 energy policies is miraculously going to fix their internal chaos and division, you know they're dreaming as they say.

JOURNALIST: Mr Butler said this morning there will probably be a limit on the number or proportion of international credits that will be allowed to reduce emissions in Australia under your scheme. What will that limit be? Will it be more than 50 per cent, more than 75 per cent? Should voters have a right to know approximately a ballpark figure about what that would be? Because it will have an influence on the overall cost.

SHORTEN: Well Mark is here and he can speak for himself. But remember, international permits, we've heard the scare campaign from the government. They think it's a bad idea. They just forgot to check with the Business Council and all the other employer groups that say it's a good idea. We believe in least cost abatement, but Mark can explain what he said.

BUTLER: Well I'd invite you to point to a business organisation that wants us to set the limit before the election because I don't think you'll find one. Every business organisation I've talked to over the last 12 or 18 months, and I engage exhaustively with them, are clear that the that the scale of access to international trading will ultimately depend on the relative costs between the international market and domestic market. The purpose of this is not to get to a particular proportion of international permits versus domestic permits. The purpose of this is to get the lowest cost abatement and that will move according to the different prices. So the overwhelming policy objective though is to give access to the most liquid market possible. That's why it's so inexplicable why the Abbott Government, Turnbull Government and Morrison Government have opposed the view of every single business organisation in this country, which is to allow businesses to trade in robust international carbon trading markets in the way they're able to trade in every other international market. So that is, consistent with the wishes of every business organisation I've engaged with, something that we would finalise after engagement with them in government.
 
JOURNALIST: On electrical car policy you've got no policy that actually ... the 50 per cent target except for rolling out chargers ... So would you be willing to intervene in the market for subsidies if it turns out that [inaudible] or is it just going to be a let's wait and see thing. And is your renewables target similarly aspirational just like your electric car targets?

SHORTEN: Mark's champing at the bit to answer this. I'll just go first though. First of all in your question you recognise the lie that the government have been saying. Because the government said - I think they let poor old Michaela Cash loose out of witness protection for a moment, then they realised that mistake and put her back under watch. But I think she said we're going to take your utes off people. The Australian newspaper has now confirmed that we're not going to mandatorily take people's utes off them, so I thank you for clearing that up. So let's go to the bigger issue. But in all seriousness we saw the government run that scare campaign remember? That you know you're going to lose your ute. I mean what rubbish - rubbish, rubbish, rubbish. Now in terms of EVs we have said that we want to put in charger stations so people in the bush can also access new technology. We've also said that in government purchasing that we would like to start orienting the purchase of the car fleet to electric vehicles. But I might get Mark to further answer this.
 
BUTLER: Thanks Greg. I'd invite you to have another look at our electric vehicle policy because there's a range of different levers we are seeking to pull other than just the infrastructure charging lever. I noted that Angus Taylor was out this morning rubbishing the idea that state governments would be looking at ways in which new commercial and large residential developments would be future-proofed by fitting electric vehicle chargers to them. He obviously didn't go and talk to Gladys Berejiklian because that is a central part of the NSW Liberal Government's policy that they took to the last election. This is just common sense to future proof new building stock, not individual houses, but large apartment buildings and commercial buildings with electric vehicle chargers to recognise that over the coming decade there is going to be a wave of electric vehicles coming to the market. Now other elements of our policy are these. We've provided that the Australian Investment Guarantee, which will provide accelerated depreciation of an additional 20 per cent in the first year's purchase of new capital, will apply to electric vehicles. That will be an enormous boost to fleets, which constitute 50 per cent of the new purchase market in Australia, moving to electric vehicles. What that will do is start to create a liquid market here, driving a second hand market for private purchases but also creating the critical mass that means that automotive companies start for the first time sending their affordable electric vehicle models to Australia. And as to the ute scare campaign that Michaelia Cash so famously started I noted, I think maybe reported in your paper Greg this morning, that General Motors is the latest company of many, many companies to announce that they will be launching an electric ute over the next three years. So this is just about making sure that Australian motorists have access to a global revolution in the car industry that every other country has access to. We currently have the lowest uptake of electric vehicles in the OECD. We want to change that.

JOURNALIST: If you're not getting to that target though, would you be prepared intervene with subsidies.
 
BUTLER: Well, obviously a government at that point is going to have to think about this, but over the last few days we have seen reports from the Academy of Technology and Engineering, from Bloomberg New Energy Finance, reports from Transurban and a range of other groups that I can't even remember over the last few days, all confirming that the ticket price of an electric vehicle will drop below the petrol and diesel equivalent by about 2025. And frankly after that happens you are going to have a boom in new purchase of electric vehicles and I think in retrospect the 50 per cent target of new sales, if that estimate by everyone in the industry is right, we'll be seen as modest in retrospect.

JOURNALIST: Childcare, Mr Shorten. Will your pay rise, will people need to be on an EA to get that pay rise and will they need to be a member of the union?
 
SHORTEN: No. Listen, no, the short answer - no. The longer answer is this. Our early childhood educators are underpaid. They are the first adults to which we entrust our kids outside the family unit. Did you know that out of 96 occupations childcare workers childhood, early childhood educators, their pay level comes in at 92? That's hopeless. Another fact which I'm going to keep banging on about is that 96 per cent of the industry are women. If it was an industry which is 96 per cent men it wouldn't be as low paid. So what we have looked at is what are the options to give these important people a better go. Ask any parent. Some of you or maybe some of you have got family who are early childhood educators, there is plenty of them in Australia. We know they're underpaid, so what's the solution? You either just let them be underpaid. Well that's intolerable isn't it? Why should we rely on a bunch of workers to sacrifice themselves just so the rest of us can have, not pay these people what they're meant to. The second option is, of course, you could ask parents to pay a lot more. But under this government childcare has been such a debacle, hasn't it? Childcare costs have gone up and up and up. So that's not an option to ask parents to pay more. You could ask all of the not for profit and for profit providers just to miraculously find the money in the system, but it's not there. So we've come up with the best option. Which is we will help contribute to the wages of early childhood educators. It won't be allocated based on their industrial instruments or enterprise agreements or union membership. So that's another Government scare campaign we can put in the bin along with the utes and the rest of the stuff they come up with. But it really comes down to this and this is really what I want to address my remarks to the Australian people. Child care is important. A lot of two income families a lot of women returning to work are caught in a vicious cycle where they've got to go to work to pay for the childcare. But the childcare is so expensive that really they're working for nothing. So what we've come up with is I think a pretty neat solution which gives a fair go to a million Australian households. Specifically, if you earn up to $68,000 in your household we'll pay for 100 per cent of the childcare. If you earn between $68,000 and $100,000 we'll pay up to 85 per cent. If you earn between $100,000 and $174,000 as total household income we'll contribute between 85 and 60 per cent subsidy. What this means practically, and when people go to make a choice to vote between now and the election, what it means is that if you've got two kids in childcare, say your household incomes around 100K or maybe just a bit north of it, what you'll be getting is in excess of $3,000 childcare fee relief. When you add that on top of what we're doing with lowering people's taxes, about 5K extra a year. This is how we get a strong economy working for middle and working class people. And I don't think anyone seriously thinks we shouldn't give early childhood educators a better deal. It's all about priorities isn't it. This government wants to give $77 billion to the top three per cent of income earners. I'd just like to give a better pay rise to 140,000 [100,000] childcare workers.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison today has announced a couple of hundred million dollars towards the PBS threshold to give patients that need medication free sooner, is that a good policy and will you match it?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I will. I think it's a good policy and we can match it. We can also match it because frankly we're making the reform decisions about winding back unsustainable subsidies at the top end. This is the way politics should be. I'm not a hater. This government will only ever have bad things to say about Labor. I adopt a different view. It's not about me, Mr Morrison, Labor or Liberal exclusively. It's about what I'm going to do for you, Australian families, Australian voters, Australians who need to use our health care system. So yep, tick. But what I would like Mr Morrison to do is match me on pension and dental care. What we're going to do is provide 2.6 million pensioners, who always get forgotten in elections, nearly 400,000 Commonwealth seniors health card holders - so 3 million people in all, we're going to provide for the first time, nationally across the board a voucher under Medicare $1,000 dollars bulk billed to contribute towards their dental care every two years. See the difference is I can afford to match a good health idea from the government because health's my number one priority. But he can't match my good ideas for pensioners and health because he's too busy defending properties, you know subsidies for the people buying their fifth and sixth property and being a soft touch on multinationals.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Can I just ask also on childcare, just following up on from Chris. Do you know you know the annual cost or the ongoing annual cost of your childcare policy? After this initial eight year period the government has costed it as and it's in today's Herald and Age at about $1.6 billion. Is that accurate?

SHORTEN: No, I don't think that is accurate. I haven't seen their costings. We'll release all our costings before the election. But as I understand in the first four years in terms of the help we're going to give early childhood educators it's about $550 million and in terms of what we're doing for childcare relief for Australian families that's about $4 billion. Again, you know when this government says we can't afford to look after childcare subsidies what they're saying to a million Australian families is you don't deserve it. When this government says we can't afford to look after early childhood educators and pay them properly, what they're saying to them is you don't deserve it. This is a government who for the last three years could find $80 billion to give away to big business. This is a government who could find $77 billion dollars - even they haven't told us how they're going to pay for it, the tricky little roosters - in terms of tax cuts for the top end. But when it comes to early childhood educators, "Oh, we don't have the money." When it comes to better subsidies for childcare for a million Aussie households, "Don't bother us, we don't have the money." Why is it this government says to millions of everyday people, to the pensioners with dental care, we can't afford that. What they're really saying is you don't deserve it.

JOURNALIST: Just putting aside the Fisher report for a moment do you accept as a basic principle that your more ambitious emission reduction total will come with a higher cost to the economy.

SHORTEN: No. What I say actually is that if we leave the problem of climate change any longer it's going to cost more to fix it. But I'll let Mark have the last word because he's been doing such a good job on our policy.

BUTLER: Thanks Bill. Well the authoritative modelling on the impact of the economy is Warwick McKibbin's. It was commissioned by Tony Abbott, authoritative modelling to compare the 26 per cent target and the 45 per cent target before Paris. Warwick McKibbin found that the impact on the economy of the two targets would be exactly the same given that Labor has a different position around international trading than the government has. So exactly the same. Now that's back in 2015. But over the last couple of weeks Warwick McKibbin has written in the Financial Review that he stands by that modelling. But if anything the cost of emissions reduction over the last four years have come down because of the extraordinary technology improvements we've seen, particularly in renewable energy. So I don't accept the premise of your question. What I do reaffirm though is what Bill has said which is the costs of inaction on climate change are dramatic. Over the last few weeks we've seen the Reserve Bank warn of them. Over the last few days we've seen APRA, the Prudential Regulation Authority, warn the costs of inaction on climate change pose a very serious risk to the stability of the financial system and that's what Scott Morrison won't talk about.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I actually just wanted to say a few words because I'm a little surprised that we're here in northern Tasmania and no one's asked us about the candidate for Lyons and those extraordinarily racist comments. What really confuses me is you've got a Prime Minister who is prepared to take action when it's a candidate for Isaacs but not prepared to take action on the candidate for Lyons. Racism is racism is racism. And when you've got two candidates saying very similar things I think it's absolutely vital that the Prime Minister shows some leadership and makes sure that the candidate for Lyons is disendorsed as the candidate for Isaacs was disendorsed. I think this is a really key difference between Bill Shorten and Scott Morrison in this election. You've got Bill Shorten who's out there with a united, disciplined team. You've got Scott Morrison who's leading a coalition of chaos and cuts. You've got Bill Shorten who's focused on positive policies for our future, whether it's more affordable childcare, whether it's real action that brings down power prices and pollution, whether it's better Medicare including Medicare dental for pensioners. You've got Bill focused on positive policies for our futures and you've got Scott Morrison who's got nothing so he's gone negative. There is a real difference here because Scott Morrison can't run on unity and discipline. We can. Scott Morrison can't run on his record because his record is chaos and cuts. And he can't run on his plan for the future because he's got no plan to lift wages. He's got no plan to lower pollution. He's got no plan to lower power prices. He's got no plan to make childcare more affordable. He's got no plan to improve Medicare. He's got no plan for this country and we do.

JOURNALIST: Tanya can I just ask do you as an MP in Sydney do you feel any sympathy for Tony Abbott having faced the defacing of his ... clearly not.
 
PLIBERSEK: No no. Sorry I'll listen to the detail of your question.

JOURNALIST: There's not much left except to say do you feel sympathy for Tony Abbott given his posters have been defaced in the way that they've been defaced.

PLIBERSEK: Look I don't like it when my posters are defaced. None of us do. All of us face it as candidates in election on occasion. I don't ever agree that posters should be defaced. In fact one of Clive Palmer's has been defaced just down the road from my place. I pass it every day. One of his big billboards. It is not something that I would ever encourage others to do, to tolerate. But do I have sympathy for Tony Abbott more generally? No I don't. I mean here is a man who is so profoundly out of touch with his electorate on climate change, on marriage equality, on a whole range of issues that people who have voted Liberal all their lives are saying no more, not now, not anymore. And the problem for Scott Morrison is that his policies are the same as Tony Abbott's. Scott Morrison is in denial about climate change. Scott Morrison opposes more renewable energy for Australia. Scott Morrison wants to spend billions of dollars of taxpayers money to see pollution continue to rise. Scott Morrison has no plan for wages to increase. Like Mathias Cormann he believes that keeping wages low is part of the economic strategy of this government. In fact, Scott Morrison's got just two plans for the future. The first is bigger tax giveaways to very wealthy people. And the second is to run for the rest of this campaign on lies and scare campaigns about Labor's positive vision.

SHORTEN: Guys the factory is going to need to get back to work but it's been good fun. Thank you.

ENDS

LEIGH SALES: The Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten, joins me now from Melbourne. Thank you very much for being with us.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: No worries Leigh.
 
SALES: Bill Shorten, you're unapologetically running for government on a big new agenda. So let's run through some of the detail of it beginning with climate change. Can we go back to first principles. Is it a fact that moving to a lower emissions economy will impose a short-term economic cost?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I was in Whyalla today, talking to the people who run OneSteel and they made it clear that they're investing in more renewable energy. So there is a cost to investing in new technology but they're absolutely convinced that the only way we will keep making steel in Australia is by investing in renewable energy. I had the same discussion up at Sun Metals in zinc in Townsville, or indeed let's just talk to the two million Australian householders who have invested in solar power. There is an initial cost and depending on the deals they can get, but most people who go to solar on households they don't go back, do they?
 
SALES: So if there is a short-term economic cost, you have a 45 per cent target for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, what will be the estimated cost of that to the economy over the next decade, not in dollar terms, but as a percentage of economic growth?
 
SHORTEN: It won't have a negative effect on economic growth. In fact, most of the mainstream modelling shows that our economy will continue to grow.
 
SALES: But if you have firms that have to be shifting and making the transition to having lower carbon emissions, that may mean that they have less money to spend on other forms of investment, it may mean they have lower profits so therefore they have less money to deliver in the form of company tax into government coffers. Those things could have a spin-off impact on to the GDP numbers?
 
SHORTEN: The problem with what you're saying is that you assume that there's no cost to doing nothing, and there is. That's why Australians wants real change at this election. They're sick of doing nothing.
 
SALES: I don't assume that there's no cost to doing nothing. I accept your position there's a long-term benefit. What I'm asking you to do is to square with the voters about exactly what the short-term cost is of getting to that position?
 
SHORTEN: Well, my absolute conviction and belief, is that if we don't change, then the cost will be far greater than any initial investments.
 
SALES: But what is the initial -

SHORTEN: If you're asking me to specify what a particular company in a particular factory will have to do, I can't do that, nor could you, nor can the Government.

SALES: Isn't it a reasonable -

SHORTEN: Let's be fair here, Leigh. Let’s be fair. I'm not going to get caught up in this Government came of gotcha when you have got to invent a number which you can't possibly.

SALES: But -

SHORTEN: There's 250 companies caught by our safeguards mechanism, the same safeguard mechanism the current government applies to 120, each company will respond differently. You and I know that the reason why the government's trying to focus on how much it might cost to put in a new renewable energy system is that they're trying to distract from the fact they have no climate change policy.
 
SALES: But if we could stick with Labor -

SHORTEN: It's so dishonest this debate. It is so dishonest -

SALES: You can't just pluck a number out of nowhere. You've come up with the 45 per cent target.
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, I didn't pluck that out of nowhere. That was the Paris Agreement. That's what the scientists tell us.
 
SALES: But if you are choosing that yes we will go with that number, with 45 per cent, you must have done...
 
SHORTEN: I'm not choosing it, the scientists say it. It's what we've got to do to stop the planet getting warmer.
 
SALES: But as a government you are adopting it as your policy. You must have done some projections short-term to what that will mean to GDP. Will it take say 0.1 per cent off GDP, 0.5 per cent off GDP over 10 years?
 
SHORTEN: Let's go to Citibank, they're an internationally reputable bank. They say that the consequences in terms of cost, of policies on climate change like ours are immaterial. So I am saying to you very clearly that both in the short term and the long term, the cost of not acting on climate change is far worse than acting on climate change. And, again, let's, when you talk about cost, what's the cost to the environment? The cost is in not acting. When you talk about the cost to business, the reality is, that lots of businesses are so far ahead of government they're already investing. This is the problem with this short-term vacuous government who has no policies in the election other than to say they're not Labor. Australian people and business are so far ahead of the political debate, you must be bored by the Government's rhetoric which simply wants to you know say we can't do this and we can't do that. The rest of the world is so far ahead of us it's embarrassing.
 
SALES: Let's turn to the Adani coal mine in Queensland. If there's a miner sitting in Rockhampton tonight watching and she wants to know, "Mr Shorten, do you reckon this mine will be a good thing for my industry and for Queensland?" What would you say to her?
 
SHORTEN: I'd say that my view on this mine is going to be based on the best science, whether or not it stacks up, and if it is, if it stacks up and passes all the scientific tests, I won't engage in sovereign risk. So in other words we won't arbitrarily upend things. But what I'll also say to that woman miner in central Queensland, is that if you're a labour hire miner, not a direct employee, I'll make sure you get paid the same as the direct employee. If you're a casual or on a fixed term contract I'll make sure you get a fairer go.
 
SALES: If we can stick to Adani for now?
 
SHORTEN: Okay sure.
 
SALES: We'll go to a range of other things shortly.
 
SHORTEN: By all means.
 
SALES: In an interview with me on 7:30 in April last year you said, "I'm a sceptic of the project, I'm not a fan of the project. I'm happy to tell people my personal opinion." So your position has changed since then?
 
SHORTEN: I think you'd be fair enough to acknowledge that then, Adani didn't get the finance but now they appear to have got the finance. The other thing of course back then is they were talking about a 60 million tonne mine with 10,000 jobs. Now the promises have shrunk to a 10 million tonne mine.
 
SALES: You're less sceptical of it now?
 
SHORTEN: In terms of the commercial high jump bar, yeah they've passed that.
 
SALES: How about the environmental one?
 
SHORTEN: Well that's going to be a matter for the state and federal regulators isn't it.
 
SALES: Various Labor candidates and MPs have had differing positions on Adani, it seems a little confusing what the party's actual position is. What do you say to the suggestion that you've created that situation by saying one thing to people in regional Queensland and one thing to environmentalists?
 
SHORTEN: I'd say that's wrong. Our position's very clear. Got to stack up commercially. Got to stack up scientifically. Got to stack up according to the law and we won't engage in sovereign risk.

SALES: Okay -

SHORTEN: If we want to talk about conflicting positions, let's be even handed here, Leigh. You have got all these Scott Morrison Liberals down in Melbourne and Sydney, they call themselves "modern Liberals", and you've got the LNP in Queensland with a different view. You have the civil war between Matt Canavan and Josh Frydenberg about where poor old Melissa Price was going to finally...
 
SALES: And I'll have the chance to ask the Prime Minister about some of that when he comes on the program. Let's move on to some other areas, you would have heard in our earlier story 83-year-old Chris Phillips, the retired carpenter who has $36,000 a year in income and he will lose $9,000 per year under your franking credits policy. Your policy is driving somebody like Chris heavily on to the public purse isn't it for everything from healthcare to social welfare?
 
SHORTEN: Well he already is and this is the real heart of the issue. When you get an income tax credit, when you haven't paid income tax, it's a gift from the Government.

You're already on the public purse. But the criteria by which you get this money is that you just happen to own shares. Now Mr Morrison has been most dishonest in this. Where he says we're coming for people's savings. No, we're not. And then he's been most dishonest and saying somehow this is a tax. What currently happens - and I have people come up to me all over Australia who say, really, I mean seriously can you believe it Leigh, when you don't pay income tax you get a tax credit?

See what the Liberals don't say to you is that when you get this dividend income, you own shares, you get the interest or the dividend from the shares, it's tax-free. But what this government does and previous governments have done it on both sides, is not only do you get the income tax free, you then get a 30 percent top-up from the government, it's a government payment.

Now, it's not illegal and it's not immoral. But did you know Leigh that this generous gift going to some people purely on the basis they get dividends from shares and don't pay tax, it's costing $6 billion a year, nearly $8 billion a year in the very near future. It is eating the Budget and it's just a gift.
 
SALES: Will your negative gearing policy make houses cheaper?
 
SHORTEN: It won't have an appreciable impact on the price of housing.
 
SALES: So what's the point of having it then? Because I seem to recall when it was introduced, it was partly to make housing more affordable?
 
SHORTEN: Well what we want to do is create a level playing field, first of all. Why should a pair of first-home buyers, you know supported by their parents, they could be in their late 20s, early 30s. They go to bid for a house, get the deposit together, they've got to look at getting the stamp duty together, it's a lot more expensive than it was 20 years ago. And then what happens is they're bidding against someone in the crowd who is getting a taxpayer subsidy in the form of negative gearing. It's not fair and the other thing is this, this nation can't afford to keep giving away money to property investors to make losses on property. Now we are grandfathering it, though so no-one will be affected who is currently invested under these laws it's prospective.

SALES: You say it won't drive housing prices down by very much. Can Australia afford to adopt a policy that drives housing prices down at the moment at all given that the Reserve Bank said in its last minutes that rapidly falling housing prices are currently a downside risk in the economy?
 
SHORTEN: Well, that's all happened under the current government and that's at the heart of this election. This government loves to talk about a strong economy but strong for who? Corporate profits are up 39 per cent but wages are only up 5 per cent. First-home buyers find it hard to get in the market, but if you're a property investor buying your sixth or seventh property, this Government gives you a subsidy. Is that really fair? I mean the heart of the problem in Australia at the moment is that we don't have any economic confidence. Wages are stagnating, cost of living is going up. What we have is that capital in this country is taxed very lightly but income is taxed very heavily. It's not fair on our young people, it's not fair on our pensioners, it's not fair on people on fixed incomes.
 
SALES: I'll come to some of those points in a second. I just want to ask about another of your controversial policies which is superannuation...
 
SHORTEN:  Sorry just to correct, when you say controversial, some in the property industry don't like negative gearing changes but a lot of people actually do like it.
 
SALES: Superannuation I'm talking about. Paul Keating and others set up superannuation so it would entice people to save for their retirement so they would be less of a burden on Government across all demographics. Why are you making it less enticing for any Australian given that that's the whole point of it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I don't accept your assumption it's less enticing. It's preferentially taxed on the way in. So in other words, the income you pay into superannuation up to a certain level is still taxed below income you take in your daily pay packet. So it is preferentially taxed on the way in and preferentially or more favourably taxed while it's in the superannuation. So I don't accept the characterisation it's less interesting. What has happened though, is we've got to make sure that the function of superannuation is to make sure that people have money for their retirement. It's not about making multimillionaires, multi-multimillionaires is it?
 
SALES: You spoke about the tax on income versus the tax on capital. Paul Keating made a point in a letter to the editor of the Financial Review last August that having 49 percent as the top marginal tax rate is way too high, especially when company tax is 30 percent. Where's Labor going to draw the line on relying on the rich to fund new spending? For example would more than 50 percent as the top marginal income tax rate be too much? Would 60 percent be where you'd draw the line? Where would you draw it?
 
SHORTEN: Leigh, you know there's no plans for 60 per cent or indeed 50 per cent, but I agree that what we need to do is eventually lighten the burden of income tax across all the levels. But to be fair, we already are offering 3.6 million Australians lower income tax at the bottom end. We've matched, we were ahead of the Government until the last budget and they basically matched our proposal for 10 million wage earners so when it comes to income tax, we are doing what we think is sensible. But the way which we also need to go in this country is not fund tax cuts on the never-never like this government is currently promising in five years’ time and the only way they can fund it is if they cut services. See this is one of the big numbers in this election. Don't worry about what a business has to do in terms of their decisions which they control. This is something Mr Morrison controls.

Did you know Leigh, that he's handing $77 billion back over the next 10 years to the top tier of income earners? So a millionaire is getting $11,000 in Scott Morrison's land a year - yet someone on a much more modest income is only getting $11 a week tax cut - it's not fair.

SALES: Let’s talk about what you might control if you are the Prime Minister by the end of the month, you've said that you'll deliver a 20 percent wage increase to childcare workers, that it's the only sector for which you'll do that because it's unique. What's unique about childcare workers but not aged care workers or disability carers?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, when it comes to community sector, there was some wage improvement made for them when Labor was last in power. When it comes to aged care, let's see what the Royal Commission does. But there are unique features of the early childhood education industry. First of all, if you look at 96 different occupations in Australia, it ranks 92nd- that's 92nd bottom, not 92nd top.

What we are relying on is these people are the first people that we trust our kids to outside the family home. We rely on them to teach our kids to learn. And also it's 96 per cent feminised. In other words -
 
SALES: Everybody would agree with that but doesn't it set a precedent -
 
SHORTEN: That's right.
 
SALE: Doesn't it set a precedent for the Federal Government to pay wages for other private sector workers in the form of direct subsidies?
 
SHORTEN: No. Let's go to that. First of all, if we agree - and you were generous enough to observe that everyone knows that early childhood educators are both important and underpaid. There's four options we've got. One, we just ask them to keep working for bugger all. Well, I don't think that's an option. So two, we can ask the parents to pay more. I don't think that's an option because child care is already horrendously expensive. In fact, we're going to provide $2,000 per family, in some cases $1,500 per-family per-child and others. But the parents shouldn't be asked to necessarily pay the whole tariff, should they? We could ask the providers and it's a hybrid industry; there's not-for-profit and for-profit operators but they're operating on increasingly tight margins. Or, the alternative is the Government recognises this is an important sector, it recognises that we shouldn't be asking parents to pay more. So we should be able to find some scarce resources to help pay the adults who are educating our kids, who have been sorely neglected. Now, this is not our wages policy for everyone else. You said, why this sector and what will you do for everyone else? There are plenty of levers if you're a fair dinkum government where we can help have real change to help working people get back on top.
 
SALES: When we take all of the policies that we've talked about tonight, is it fair for a viewer to conclude that a Shorten Labor Government will be at its core about the redistribution of wealth, that you want to take more from the wealthy and give more to people on lower incomes?
 
SHORTEN: No, that wouldn't be right. What we want to do is have real change, because, frankly, more of the same under this government isn't good enough for Australians -
 
SALES: But as I said, when we go through your policies, a lot of where you're getting your revenue from is taxes on wealthy people, closing loopholes that mostly wealthy people can exploit and you're wanting to spend money on lower income people. How is that not a form of changing the economy towards a model of redistribution?
 
SHORTEN: Perhaps if you bear with me for a moment, I'll answer your question.

First of all, we are advocating for real change. Everywhere I go in Australia, people are sick of a lack of vision. You know this election is about a choice. The Government are saying stay the course, stay with the current mob. We're staying no actually, this nation can do better. That's why we are closing loopholes, we're stopping spending money on franking credits - we're going to stop giving out tax cheques to people who haven't paid income tax and instead we're going to spend that money for example, on pensioner dental.
 
SALE: But if you - if you reject the assertion -
 
SHORTEN: No, no, hang on, Leigh. You keep characterising my policies -
 
SALES: No, no, no, but what I want you to do is try to do it -

SHORTEN: Well, I want to try and answer -
 
SALES: Because if I'm wrong, if I am wrong and it's the core of your government is not about taxing wealthy people to redistribute income to lower incomes, in a sentence, what is going to be the core of the Shorten Labor Government?
 
SHORTEN: A fair go for all. We're going to invest in people and invest in infrastructure. You ask, you want - let's not dumb politics down to six second sound bites, that's what annoys people. I'll tell you what we will do - I'll give you as quick as possibly I can. We're going to have real change because more of the same isn't good enough. We're going to get wages moving again. We're going to take real action on climate change. We're going to look after three million pensioners and Commonwealth Senior Health Card holders with dental care, we're going to provide a million Australian families with better support child care then they are getting. And we're going to end the chaos. One topic we haven't talked about tonight is the lurch to the right by the current Government.
 
SALES: That's a matter for me to Scott Morrison about. With all -
 
SHORTEN: Ok, but I'm happy to contribute, though.
 
SALES: If you need to have a glass of water while I ask the question, please feel free.
 
SHORTEN: That's alright.
 
SALE: If - you listed out that list of things that you would like to deliver, the issue for you in an election campaign are that voters have to trust that you will actually deliver on that. Why should they trust Labor to deliver on that? You'd point, for example, just to your last thing there, to chaos. People remember the last couple of terms of Labor in office.
 
SHORTEN: Well, fair's fair. In the six years that the current government have been in, Labor has been united. I have got a tremendously talented Shadow Cabinet. People can also trust us because we're actually not hiding our policies. You said in your introduction that Labor -  I think Laura Tingle did, sorry. She said Labor is putting forward a big agenda. Well, we are. We believe that if we want the Australian people to trust us, we have to trust them and tell them what we're going to do.

Now, I know not everyone is going to agree with everything. But for six years, we've learned our lesson. We're not chaotic and divided. The other thing of course is if you vote for me, you get a Labor Government. Whereas if you vote for Mr Morrison, who knows what deals he's done with Pauline Hanson and Clive Palmer and the other assorted extreme right-wing bar scene from Star Wars.
 
SALES: If you're elected, you're unlikely to have a majority in the Senate. If you can't get through your revenue-raising reforms - super, franking credits, negative gearing and so forth - which of your promised spending will you be dropping?
 
SHORTEN: Leigh, let's see how we go in the election first. We haven't won and we haven't lost. But one thing's for sure. In the event we do win, we have put our policies to the people beforehand. What business tell me, what families tell me, what small business, what farmers tell me is that they're sick of surprises. What we are doing is we are putting our policies before the election to the people. So even though people use the word mandate quite casually in politics, I genuinely believe we will have a mandate and we'll do our best to convince the Senate. I mean, one thing I should say is that seeing the profusion of small and cranky parties in the Senate, I do think people should vote the same way in the Senate as they do in the House. What we don't want is instability. People are sick and tired of us politicians always being at each other's throats. What they want to see is us putting the people first. So what we're doing is putting people at the centre of all of our decisions.
 
SALES: Mr Shorten, we've covered a lot of ground tonight. I'm sure our viewers appreciate your time very much. Thank you.
 
SHORTEN: Thanks for the conversation, Leigh. It was great.
 
ENDS

E&OE TRANSCRIPT 
DOORSTOP
ADELAIDE
WEDNESDAY, 1 MAY 2019

NADIA CLANCY, CANDIDATE FOR BOOTHBY: I am Nadia Clancy, I am Labor's candidate for the Federal Seat of Boothby and I am really excited to have so many members of Federal Labor team here today. I have got Bill Shorten, Tanya Plibersek, Mark Butler and Amanda Rishworth and it's been really lovely having them in Boothby, meeting with little ones, little youngest residents of Boothby and also some of our early-childhood educators. I'll pass over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks. That was Nadia Clancy, running in a David and Goliath struggle in Boothby. Labor hasn't won Boothby since 1943 but Nadia Clancy is making this a real competition for the voters of Boothby. That is what elections should be actually they should be about the future. And that means that this election is all about climate change. When we talk to the children here, the politicians of Australia really need to do more to protect the future of our kids. There is no clearer test about the future than climate change. Only Labor has got a real plan to take action on climate change. We want to get on and start fixing the problems so we can hand on a better deal for our children's future. Contrast this with the complete chaos and division of the last six years of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government. What we have seen is complete chaos in the ranks of the government. The reason why Malcolm Turnbull couldn't get anything done on climate change is because he was held to ransom by Peter Dutton and Tony Abbott and the right wing of the Liberal Party. But, there is an even bigger problem looming. Mr Morrison has managed to take himself hostage to Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. We can't afford to have another three years of inaction on climate change, our kids deserve better. I would now like to hand over to Tanya Plibersek and we will talk a bit more about all the exciting things Labor is going to do to help kids in the future.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Well, thanks very much Bill and it is always lovely to visit an early learning centre like this and to meet with the staff here and of course the children. And we have been focusing a lot on early childhood education in recent days and making it more affordable for families and making sure that this underpaid workforce is properly remunerated for the important work they do. But our focus is also on the future when it comes to climate change. You've got a real contrast here between Bill Shorten, who has got a positive vision for the future, and Scott Morrison who has got nothing so he has gone negative. You have got a real contrast between Bill Shorten, who leads a united, stable team and Scott Morrison who has got a coalition of chaos planned for Australia. You have got a contrast between Labor that wants to invest in schools and hospitals and a Coalition that wants to provide bigger tax loopholes to the top end of town. What we have seen in recent days is the Liberal Party and the Nationals chasing deals with One Nation and the Palmer United Party, the United Australia Party, Clive Palmer's party. This is a real concern for Australia. You have got Scott Morrison chasing a deal with Clive Palmer, the guy that ripped off his workers at Queensland Nickel, that has ripped off mum and dad investors at his Coolum resort, that has ripped off taxpayers by making taxpayers foot the bill for the worker's entitlements that he should have paid and he is now, today it is revealed, chasing better newspaper coverage with his extraordinarily large ad buy in local newspapers. On the other hand you have Scott Morrison's deputy doing a deal with One Nation, saying that the Coalition shares values and policies with One Nation. And you have got Pauline Hanson crying on TV, feeling sorry for herself. Well, she should feel sorry for the cuts that she supported. Pauline Hanson should stop feeling sorry for herself and feel sorry instead for the schools she's cut, the pensions she's cut, the family tax benefits she's cut, the apprenticeships she's cut. Instead of feeling sorry for herself she should feel sorry for what she has done to ordinary Australians. So what you have before you is a choice between Bill's stable and united team and a coalition of creeps, crackpots and cranks. I think the choice is clear, if people want stability they should vote Labor.
 
JOURNALIST: On your announcement today Mr Shorten, there are number of examples of renewable projects in the Upper Spencer falling over, the solar thermal plant in Port Augusta for the most recent example, how is this plan going to change anything?

SHORTEN: I've got Mark Butler here to add to it but i just want to put the government on notice that the people of Australia are over excuses and delay and distraction on taking real action on climate change. We regard climate change and a real plan for it as one of the key four or five issues in this election. I am pleased to note that the AEC has reported that quarter of a million Australians have voted in the first two days. This is 100,000 more than at the same time in 2016. And what Labor people are telling me when they are handing out how to vote cards to vote Labor is that a lot of people are talking about climate change. I'll get Mark to go to your specifics.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: Thank you Bill, thanks for this question. Today we're announcing Labor's third renewable energy zone which will be in the Spencer Gulf region. A region where there has already been substantial renewable energy development. The purpose behind these announcements is to provide a very clear investor signal about where the best renewable energy resources are in Australia, as identified by the Energy Market Operator. These renewable energy zones come from recommendations contained in the integrated systems plan which has been the subject of very deep engagement by AEMO with the sector and by scientific experts and we intend to really boost investor confidence there. What it also means is we're starting to identify areas in the country which will be particular focuses of our energy security modernisation fund, a $5 billion fund that Bill and Chris Bowen and I announced late last year that will help underpin the new transmission investment we need to connect up the load centres like the big cities and the manufacturing centres with the new areas of renewable energy generation which will include the Spencer Gulf. Now the concern I think in the investor community in renewable energy is that this government, the Coalition Government has made it clear there will be absolutely no support from the Liberal and National parties for any renewable energy development beyond next year. This is creating great investor - really dashing investor confidence in this industry that has been responsible for so much job creation and investment over the last few years. So what Labor wants to do with its 50 per cent Renewable Energy Target, its energy security modernisation fund and its response to the clear recommendations from AEMO about renewable energy zones, is continue to boost that investor confidence which will, according to independent modelling, result in 70,000 additional jobs just as a result of our 50 per cent Renewable Energy Target through the 2020s.
 
JOURNALIST: Some of the issue was getting workers to the upper Spencer area. How are you going to solve that problem with your plan?
 
BUTLER: You need a long-term plan. At the moment under this government what you have is a plan, the Renewable Energy Target that Penny Wong put in place in 2009, that ends next year. This government has been doing everything it can to demolish that plan. But it still is in existence because of Labor's opposition to their attempts to abolish it. But what you don't have is any investor confidence beyond next year and that's what Labor's 50 per cent Renewable Energy Target will do. That will give people the confidence to move to areas like these renewable energy zones because there will be long-term jobs there.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Butler on climate change yesterday you said it was impossible to model Labor's policies but Labor has also promised that the details will be released before the election. Which is it? Impossible to cost? Or will costings be released?
 
BUTLER: Yesterday I was asked whether the Parliamentary Budget Office had costed our program and it's very clear the Parliamentary Budget Office, the PBO, is responsible for costing and modelling programs that involve revenue and spending by government. This does not involve any revenue or spending by government any more than Scott Morrison's application of this safeguards mechanism, designed and introduced by Malcolm Turnbull, involves any revenue or spending by government. Scott Morrison would give exactly the same response that I gave yesterday. Their safeguards mechanism, that's been in operation for some years, has never been subject to any costing by the Parliamentary Budget Office because it does not involve any pricing of carbon. It does not involve any revenue and it does certainly not involve any spending by the government.
 
JOURNALIST: Would you rule out another climate deal with the Greens? And do you think that the Gillard Greens deal in 2011 was a success?
 
SHORTEN: Well I see that the Greens are sort of trailing their coat and saying, "Look at me." The fact of the matter is that if we get elected we'll be making decisions in a Labor Cabinet and the decisions will be made by members of Parliament of the Labor Party. What we will do is we will implement the policies we've put forward. I think even our harshest critics would agree that we are the party who is putting forward policies in this election and we're outlining all of what we intend to do. We're not for switching because some independent MP or some Greens MP is suffering relevance deprivation and wants to see their name in the paper. And I tell you if you want to talks about the coalitions in Canberra there is only one coalition - the coalition of Mr Morrison, Ms Hanson and Mr Palmer and this is a coalition of chaos and cuts. If people are looking for stability at the next election, if they just want to be sure that who they vote for is who they're going to get, vote one Labor - and vote one Labor for real action on climate change.
 
JOURNALIST: On health you've announced a range of health policies. Do you rule out in the next term of government lifting the Medicare levy for high income earners?
 
SHORTEN: We have no plan to lift the Medicare levy. The reason why I can say that with such confidence is because we're making the hard economic decisions. We're clamping down on the multinationals. We're not going to spend hundreds of billions of dollars on unfunded tax cuts as this government is promising. And what that means for Australians is if you're one of three million Australian pensioners or Commonwealth health seniors card-holders, you are going to get $1,000 assistance through Medicare every two years with your teeth. What our health promises mean is that if you are one of the two Australians who will be diagnosed with cancer by the time you're in your mid-80s, Labor is going to virtually reduce your out-of-pocket costs to as low as we possibly can. It means that if you use hospitals and you're waiting for arthroscopies, for knee surgeries, for hip replacements, for cataracts, Labor's got your back and we're going to reduce the out-of-pocket costs to see a doctor.
 
JOURNALIST: A few months ago, Chris Bowen said voters unconvinced about your plans for taxation were perfectly entitled to vote for other parties. What about voters unconvinced by your answers about climate change and working with the Greens? What should they do?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, we want as many people as possible to vote for us. And I will again, very briefly, not to not push your patience, I will again repeat - no coalition with the Greens. Sorry, Richard, it's not happening. And in terms of our taxation policies, you can do the maths yourself. We're offering a million Australian households help with their childcare. A subsidy to working parents, an additional $1,500 to $2,100 for every child in the system every year. We're going to look after the pensioners. I mean it's long overdue that someone did something for the pensioners. You don't have to put a wraparound ad on your bus. That's not action. That's propaganda. What you actually need is to really help the pensioners. We're really helping the pensioners by providing additional assistance in dental care.
 
JOURNALIST: I get that it's uncomfortable for you in an election campaign to say that you would go into a deal with the Greens, but doesn't everybody in this country know that you can't get your climate deal through any Parliament we could imagine without coalitions of some sort. So if you're not getting into bed with the Greens, who are you going to get into bed with to carry your climate plans?
 
SHORTEN: Tim, trust in politics is at an all-time low. And one of the ways Labor is going to rebuild trust in Australian politics is we'll tell people before an election what we intend to do after an election. The good news for us is that if we're elected, we're elected to implement our policies. I do not expect the Senate to stand in the way of our government, if we are elected, when we clearly outlined all our policies and have such a strong mandate in the event that we are elected.
 
JOURNALIST: Clive Palmer is going to be in town tomorrow. So is Mark Latham from One Nation. They're expected to announce Murray-Darling river plans. Will Labor have anything in addition to say about the Marray Darling basin plan before the election.
 
SHORTEN: First of all, I understood that Mr Palmer has said he wants to rip up the plan.
 
JOURNALIST: He has.
 
SHORTEN: Well I think that's a disaster for South Australia. I mean Palmer is basically a billboard with no substance. He's a text message with no follow-through. What's happening here is Australian democracy is under threat. What we are actually seeing is Mr Palmer is trying to buy the Australian democratic system with $70 or $80 million. Unfortunately, Mr Morrison is his accomplice. I've got to say again - and I'll come back to you - Palmer can't pay for his promises. You all know that he makes it up. You all know that what he's done is he has basically hooked Morrison into whatever mad-cap schemes Palmer is going to run around and promise. People can sniff a fake a long way away and in terms of Mr Morrison, what was he thinking, letting himself be taken hostage to Mr Palmer or the extremists of One Nation? You know, you don't need to have a Rhodes Scholarship to work out that Clive Palmer never does anything for free. If Clive Palmer promises to do something for you, you can be reasonably sure there's strings attached.

JOURNALIST: You said you want 50 per cent electric cars by 2030. If a Labor government wins the election, would you provide subsidies for, you know, Gupta electric cars or other providers?
 
SHORTEN: What I've actually said is that we'd like to see 50 per cent of new car sales be electric vehicles. What Labor will do to help create, make that an option, is we want to help put in a network of charging stations so it's a real option for people. What we've also said is that government fleet purchasing requirements over that time will move towards more electric vehicles as part of our mix. The reason why we're doing this is twofold. One is, I know that around the world other people in other countries are getting access to cheaper electric vehicles which, of course, save your petrol bills. But in Australia, because we've got such a backward, technophobic, anti-climate change government, motorists are being denied cheaper options for their motor vehicles. So we think this is good on climate because it will help reduce emissions. We think it's also appropriate that Australia shouldn't become this sort of, you know, Albania of the southern hemisphere where in fact we are blocked away from new technology because we've got an ignorant, anti-scientific, anti-climate change, anti-technology government.

JOURNALIST: Would you provide subsidies?

SHORTEN: No we don't have any plans to do that.

JOURNALIST: With your emissions reduction target, you say that businesses will take the reins with how they choose to reduce pollution. How can you be sure that they will do that? Would you introduce civil penalties for non-compliance?

SHORTEN: We have a safeguards mechanism. But what I'll do is I'll get Mark to supplement that answer.
 
BUTLER: Thank you. As Bill pointed out we've decided after very deep engagement with the business community to accept their request to continue working with the safeguards mechanism, the mechanism that was introduced by Malcolm Turnbull. What that will do is set particular limits on pollution for the 250 biggest polluters in the country. Now, that is 0.01 per cent of Australian businesses. 99.99 per cent of Australian businesses won't be touched at all by this policy. Companies will have to abide by those limits but they will be given, as they do under the safeguards mechanism now, as they do under the mechanism that was introduced by Malcolm Turnbull, but what we will do is give them the broadest array of possible options for offsetting any breach of those limits. Every single request by the business community, for example, to allow them to continue engaging in international trading, which every business organisation in the country has asked for, to allow offsets to a reinvigorated carbon farming market, to allow access potentially for electricity offsets, to allow businesses that beat their baselines to be able to create credits that they can either move within their business, sell to other businesses or bank for future years. All of these requests, after 12 to 18 months of deep engagement with the business community, are featured in the Australian Labor Party policy.
 
JOURNALIST: Wasn't the safeguards mechanism introduced by Tony Abbott, not Malcolm Turnbull?
 
BUTLER: It was Tony Abbott's policy but came into place under Malcolm Turnbull's prime ministership. It continued all through his prime ministership, it continues now under Scott Morrison's.
 
JOURNALIST: It's interesting that you're using the Tony Abbott climate change mechanism.
 
BUTLER: So a range of businesses already have these legal obligations under this policy and we've heard the calls from the Australian business community for investor confidence to continue working with the mechanism that already exists. What that also does is allow a platform for potential bipartisanship if the Liberal Party ever gets over its allergy to climate change action. In the same way that we have said in response to a unanimous request from business organisations that we would move forward with the National Energy Guarantee, a policy which Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg said would deliver $550 in power bill cuts for Australian households, that Scott Morrison then walked away from. As a result, as was modelled last year by Scott Morrison, power bills are going up and up and up again.
 
JOURNALIST: What are your assumptions on the amount of international credits that will be brought by business under your policy? And what are your assumptions on the future pricing of these credits? And I understand the PBO can't do costings but if you haven't got those assumptions, why not get them before the election from an economist?
 
BUTLER: Well the business community made very clear with us what they wanted to hear from the Australian Labor Party before the election and what they wanted to engage with an Australian Labor Party government, if we're lucky enough to win the election, after the election. And for example, access to international permits, the way in which the emissions reduction trajectory would be designed over the course of the decade, the way in which the Carbon Farming Initiative would be reinvigorated, were all things that every business group - you can go and talk to them Greg - every business group said, "We want to engage with you as a government, not as an opposition party because..."
 
JOURNALIST: But do you have assumptions on the amount of international credits that business will buy because at the moment ...

BUTLER: It will depend on price, Greg. It would depend on price and we're confident that with a reinvigorated carbon farming market there will be much more supply of very affordable credits from the Australian carbon farming market. Now the business community still wants the ability, if they need to, to access international permits either through a global market or through bilateral trading arrangements that we might have with countries in our region. But those are matters that they want to engage in a discussion with once we're in government, if we win the election. Go and ask any business group and that will be their answer.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on Jeremy Hearn, a couple of days ago, your Senate candidate in the Northern Territory resigned after sharing anti-Semitic posts on social media. If one candidate is responsible and reflective of the entire party, aren't Labor also in trouble on this?
 
SHORTEN: No. There's a world of difference here. First of all, this fellow, who I haven't met, who was in the Northern Territory Senate ticket, I don't think that what he did anyone is contrasting with the complete Islamaphobia of the Liberals. But nonetheless, not appropriate. Gone. But goodness me when will we finally admit what everyone actually knows? The Liberal Party is riddled with right-wing extremists. It doesn't matter if it's Andrew Hastie contradicting Ian Goodenough or Ian Goodenough contradicting Andrew Hastie about what right-wing nutter they meet with or indeed this Islamaphobe, this racist. You know after Christchurch what do you need to get people to wake up in the Liberal Party and say it's unacceptable? But the real problem here is that it just confirms another day the Liberal Party of Australia is riddled with right-wing extremists. The Liberal Party is making, and the National Party are making preference arrangements with right-wing extremists like the One Nation Party. I mean we've had chaos in the last six years. And people are sick of the chaos. But because of Mr Morrison's personal choices to work with Clive Palmer, because of his coalition partner - I mean they're in the Coalition except when it suits the Nats to say they're not and do a dirty deal with One Nation. You know there's a pattern of behaviour emerging here that the Liberals and Nationals are riddled with right-wing extremists and the one thing it means, as people vote today and tomorrow and right through to May 18, is that if you're sick of the instability and chaos, vote Labor at the next election.
 
JOURNALIST: Just on climate change, do you acknowledge the simple fact that you're asking Australians to vote for something without knowing what the full cost of it will be? And can you understand why that worries people?
 
SHORTEN: No, I don't agree with any of the assumptions in that question for the following reasons. The Australian people have already worked out what the Liberal Party haven't. Climate change is real. I don't need to give a lecture about climate change to two million Australians who've put solar power on their rooftop. They see the advantages of moving to renewables. It's without a doubt one of the top two or three issues in this election. People are actually sick and tired of politicians. They're sick and tired of the fear and the scare campaigns. They're sick and tired of lazy, right-wing, anti-climate change governments coming up with every excuse in the world to say the future's too hard. We're in a childcare centre. These kids have a reasonable expectation that the adults and the leaders in their world will be as optimistic about the future as our young people are. What optimism or hope is there in the future of Australia when you vote for the Liberal Nationals who basically hate doing anything on climate change? If this government was fair dinkum on climate change Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister of Australia. Thanks, everybody. We'll see you at the next function.
 
ENDS

HANNAH BEAZLEY, CANDIDATE FOR SWAN: Hi everyone, I'm Hannah Beazley, Labor's candidate for Swan in the upcoming election. It is a pleasure to welcome you here today to one of our local schools that will benefit from our announcement today. And as usual it is a great pleasure to welcome Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition, and Tanya Plibersek our shadow minister for education, back into my electorate of Swan and my community, so thank you all.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody, it's great to be here at a great Catholic primary school, doing great things for the kids and doing a great job actually for Australia. Now Tanya and I and Mark Butler are here visiting with Hannah and we're pleased to say that a Labor government, if it gets elected on May the 18th, is going to invest a billion dollars to help make our schools solar schools. Four thousand schools will benefit from an upgrade, or indeed the introduction of new technology, to get their power bills down, and to also make sure we're doing more on climate change. These are very sensible proposals  which are going to help schools with the cost of living challenges, which are going to help provide power into the grid and means that we can do something proper on climate change. In terms of where we go on this, what the government's - what we will do as the government is we will work with both government and non-government schools to roll out this program. What I'd like to do now is to ask Tanya to talk further about this program and also Mark Butler.

TANYA PLIBERSEK SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Well, thanks very much Bill and it is such a delight to visit this lovely school. I will let Mark answer some questions in more detail about the new solar schools program. But I wanted to make an additional announcement today that Labor would invest almost $21 million extra into TAFE facilities here in Western Australia. We've got so many fantastic projects before us in this new TAFE investment plan including for example $10 million towards a new state-of-the-art TAFE facility in Armadale. That would be matched by the Western Australian government, so it'd be a beautiful new TAFE there. Almost $5 million for three new NDIS and aged care training centres at Joondalup, Mount Lawley and Rockingham. And $3 million for a new Metronet training facility at Midland TAFE. Obviously Metronet will be a huge job generator here in the West. We're expecting about ten thousand extra jobs and having new training facilities at that TAFE into engineering, metal fabrication and the jobs that will be required from the build of the Metronet is really important. The solar schools program is a very exciting program. We made sure that about half of Australian schools had solar panels when we were last in government but this is a significant step up from that last program. Obviously the technology is much better than it was when we rolled out those initial schools with solar panels on their roofs. But even schools that have those earlier panels, like this school here, talk about the savings that they're already making on their electricity bills. Now that panels are cheaper and more efficient, you'll see even greater savings. But the exciting thing about the program that we're announcing today is it's not just panels on the roofs, it's batteries, so that the power can be stored for the use of the school or in periods when the school is not using the power it can be sold back into a virtual power network. It can power homes and businesses in the local community. That means that the school can even, not just reduce its own power bills, but potentially make money from the power that it's selling back into the grid. When you think about the number of days that schools are not using a lot of power, particularly during the Christmas holidays, particularly on the weekends, you see that they are peak times for domestic power use. So the school is not using the power but the power can be sold back into the grid for homes that are using their air conditioning a little bit more over the summer holidays or using the, you know, got the tele on a little bit more during the weekend and the summer holidays. This is an absolutely win-win situation for schools, but also it provides reliability and stability in the power grid too.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions ?
 
JOURNALIST: On your climate change policy, you have said that it's impossible to price and you have also quoted research saying it would have the same economic impact as the Coalition's policy. Let's put all this to rest, why couldn't you have costed this with the PBO before the election, just like you did your negative gearing policy? And they could have taken into account the cost of climate change, which you've said is over $10 billion, you've quoted a figure on that as well.

SHORTEN: Alright, I think I understand your question, it's about the cost of climate change and the cost of our policies. I've got Mark Butler here today as well, which as a little aside, I've got my climate change minister with me, we're in Western Australia, I don't think, a little prize could get Melissa Price photographed with Scott Morrison, while they're over here talking about climate. But that's just the small part. The big picture is, as we heard last night in the debate, this government has got every excuse in the book not to take action on climate change. Climate change is real. Climate change is extracting a big cost as you said correctly, Greg. It's estimated at $18 billion dollars a year in natural disasters and some of that is obviously due to more extreme weather events and climate. Sorry, Greg I'm going to do you the courtesy of your three point question and get I and Mark to answer it if you will let me. Now on the cost of climate change, we think there is a big cost. You and I know that this government is going down every rabbit hole, down every burrow, on every sideshow, to avoid one fact: they don't have a climate policy, do they? I mean if they were going to have a climate policy which was serious Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. But you talk about modelling, why don't I get Mark to talk about the plethora of material which is already there.

BUTLER: Thank you Bill, thank you Greg for your question. The PBO would not have modelled the safeguards mechanism for us anymore than it's modelled the safeguards mechanism for Malcolm Turnbull, who introduced the mechanism, and Scott Morrison, for whom it's continuing as a part of their policy mix. We of course, have had the Clean Energy Finance Corporation policy, which is underpinning this amazing program we're announcing today, costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office. But if I can go to the point about the cost impact of the policy we've announced. It is impossible to cost this because a Labor government, led by Bill Shorten and Tanya Plibersek, would not be imposing a direct carbon price on businesses. It certainly would not be imposing a carbon tax, any more than Malcolm Turnbull or Scott Morrison have, because what we've decided to do after talking exhaustively with business groups over the last 12 or 18 months is simply adopt the safeguards mechanism that was introduced by Malcolm Turnbull. Now all that mechanism does is set a limit on carbon pollution. Businesses are able to stick to their limit then they won't hear from the government anymore. Obviously, required to report on those limits, but other than that there is no price impact at all. And if they're not able to stick to their limit, in the same way that they're not under the safeguards mechanism as it operates now, they will have the broadest possible range of offsets. But how business deals with that is going to be a matter for them. It won't be dictated by Canberra so it can't be costed by Canberra. It will be a matter for them. That is what business unanimously has asked the Labor party to adopt as our policy. Now if I can go to the broader macroeconomic impact because this is something that your paper has written a fair bit about. We've only seen over the last week or two again, Citibank, a bank very, very expert in analysis about climate and energy policy, declare over the last several days that the impact of Labor's policy would be immaterial, even on those businesses impacted by the policy, let alone the broader economy. Warwick McKibbin, who was commissioned by the Abbott government to conduct macroeconomic modelling of the 26 per cent target and the 45 per cent target found then that the Labor policy and the Liberal policy - remembering that the Labor policy includes international trading - would have no different impact whatsoever. The impact on the economy would be exactly the same, which would be that the economy over the course of the decade would grow in real terms by about 23 per cent. Now that was back in 2015 but Warwick McKibbin has written in the Financial Review only in recent days reaffirming that policy with one exception which is to say he thinks the costs of emissions reduction will actually be lower than he thought in 2015 because of the extraordinary technological improvements that have been made in the energy sector.

JOURNALIST: Will you be extending the childcare wage subsidy to other industries and if not, why did you say yesterday that childcare would be the first sector?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all we think childcare is a unique sector. So the model in which we're going to finally sort out the underpayment of early childhood educators is a model, a template which we will only use in childcare. In terms of the first industry to see wages movement we have other mechanisms to help other industries. Now I make no apology for the fact that I want to reverse the penalty rate cuts which have seen, as the McKell Institute says, if they are not reversed, $2.8 billion dollars of pay taken out of the pockets of hundreds of thousands of low paid workers in restaurants, in accommodation, in pharmacy. So we've got a range of different strategies. But for early childhood educators, it almost, this government is so mean-spirited, Mr Morrison must have a very warped view of how you treat underpayment of workers in childcare. To rule it out, to say we won’t fix childcare unless everyone else gets an identical pay rise – well this is just absurd. The fact of the matter is and you may be aware that if you look at 96 occupational categories in Australia, childcare comes in at the 92nd lowest paid. 92nd. And it’s no coincidence in my opinion that it’s an industry predominantly populated by women, in other words 96 per cent of the workforce are women. So when you join the dots, a feminised industry, underpaid, early childhood education, underpaid. We've come up with a plan to help early childhood educators. I mean, the poverty of Mr Morrison’s wages policy, we heard it in the debate last night where when he was asked about wages he started talking about emissions reduction. You know join those dots for me. But the point about it is he doesn’t have a plan for peoples wages and the only answer that his poor old minister Birmingham gave today or last night about early childhood educators, he said 'get the providers to pay them more'. Well that's a great plan Simon because the providers will make parents pay more. So Mr Birmingham’s only plan to help early childhood educators is to make parents pay. We don’t have that plan, we've come up with I think a special solution to deal ... and you don’t have to take my word for it, ask all the parents who send their kids to childcare.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you review the RBA's target rate for inflation if you win the election?

SHORTEN: We think that the RBA should be independent in terms of its setting of monetary policy. The RBA has said that it likes to see inflation between two and three per cent. I think the bigger problem or the bigger challenge for me isn't what the RBA says inflation should be, it’s the fact in the last quarter inflation was zero per cent. Can I tell you, that’s the equivalent of the alarm going off in the fire station. When you've got zero per cent inflation that means people aren't spending money. The reason why people aren't spending money is under this government they're unconfident. And one of the reasons they're unconfident is we see cuts to schools and hospitals. We also see wage stagnation. You know Mr Morrison loves to talk about a strong economy. But a strong economy for exactly who? The reality is that there is one million Australians that have got to hold down two jobs to make ends meet. There’s one million Australians plus who every month say they'd like more work. The reality is that we've seen prices going up, cost of living, childcare, healthcare, energy prices. This economy is not working in the interests of middle and working class people. Under Mr Morrison it’s never been a better time to be a high-priced CEO or a multinational in Australia. Under Mr Morrison it’s never been a worse time to be a middle class wage earner in this country.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you've just described the recent inflation number unless I’m wrong as alarming.

SHORTEN: That was the metaphor I used.
 
JOURNALIST: Well, tell me if I'm taking you out of context here because I wanted to get a sense of how much peril you believe the Australian economy is in when inflation is flat-lining. Just how bad is it?
 
SHORTEN: I think this government's economic record is pretty bloody hopeless. Let's just call it as it is. Let me answer your question, you've asked. First of all let’s go to some key numbers. Under this government, debt has gone up. Debt has doubled under this government. That's a problem because if interest rates go up all of a sudden Australians will be stuck with paying bigger interest rate payments on a government’s national debt that they’ve run up. We've got the problem of under-employment. We’ve got the problem of wages stagnation, now you see zero per cent inflation. This economy is not operating in the interests of working people. What we've got is a government with a very threadbare policy offering. You all saw, well hopefully you all saw the debate last night. What we saw is two contrasting policies. We've got a positive vision for the future. We understand that if you invest in education you're going to get a productive workforce in the future. We understand that if you aim for the world’s best healthcare system you're going to have healthier Australians. We understand that when you take on cost of living and don't just leave it, that what we do is we see price restraint in childcare, private health insurance. More renewables will ultimately mean lower prices. We're the only party with a wages policy and we want to take real action on climate change. By contrast, what did Mr Morrison offer viewers watching last night? His only argument for re-election is that he's not Labor. I mean his only argument is very threadbare. You and I know this is the most threadbare policy offering in a century of Australian elections. They just basically say it'll trickle down. If we look after the top 10 per cent, the top 5 per cent, maybe you'll get more tips on your plate when you go out to lunch. They say that they’re going to give you tax cuts in five years’ time. But do they explain to you where the money's coming from? They’re promising you unfunded tax plans on the never-never which can only be delivered if there are cuts to hospitals, and services and they're promising business as usual. That’s not good enough for Australia. The Australian people need a government worthy of the people.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you your reaction to Steve Dickson resigning from One Nation over the strip club incident.

SHORTEN: He should have. His comments were appalling, absolutely appalling. Should have resigned. But it just I think highlights the bigger problem this desperate Morrison government has. No wonder they're cranky in their public presentation at the moment. They realise that they've pulled the wrong reins. They've made as their key allies Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party and Clive Palmer. You know, this is chaotic. Imagine if Mr Morrison sneaks home at the election, courtesy of Pauline Hanson's One Nation and Clive Palmer. Imagine if we have a country who if you vote Liberal or One Nation or Palmer United party and you have Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson calling the shots to the government. I mean does anyone seriously believe that Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson just give their preferences to Mr Morrison without there being an IOU on the other side of the election? I promise you this - a vote for Morrison is a vote for Hanson and Palmer and it's a vote for chaos, chaos, chaos.

JOURNALIST: On wages, what about aged care workers, don't they deserve a pay increase as well and can you promise that to that industry?
 
SHORTEN: I think that aged care workers are underpaid. But we have got a Royal Commission under way, let's see what the Royal Commission produces in the way of it. I want to pay a compliment to our aged care workers. They do a lot of work with a lot of vulnerable people. I think that we need to invest more in aged care generally. But I think let's have the Royal Commission. The solution that we have looked at for early childhood educators is a recognition that nothing else has worked. They are underpaid, they're highly trained, and it is long overdue that we do the right thing.
 
JOURNALIST: Which childcare workers will get the pay increase, will it be all of them?
 
SHORTEN: Our plan is that all childcare workers would see an improvement in their wages.
 
JOURNALIST: On the economy and interest rates, if the Reserve Bank decides to reduce interest rates next  month, a rate reduction during the height of an election campaign, what do you think that that says about the economy?
 
SHORTEN: First of all the RBA has got to make its decisions independent of government pressure. So the decision they make, I'm not going to start putting pressure on them. I think though that if they felt they had to do that, that is not a reflection on the Reserve Bank. It is a reflection on the Australian Government isn't it? This is a government who has boasted about their strong economic management but the fact that we are even talking about an interest rate cut shows the anaemic weakness in the current government's economic management. What this nation needs is we need to make sure that we are not just relying on our mineral exports, as important as they are, to prop up our economy. We need to go back to the fundamentals. Let's invest in people, let's invest in infrastructure. You know let's invest in our human capital and let's invest in our physical infrastructure. We've got a plan, for example, in Western Australia to invest in Metronet. We've got a plan to make sure in Victoria or in Queensland we invest in key public transport and of course the Bruce Highway and you name it, we've been looking at infrastructure. That's good, that's more productivity. We want to upgrade our ports and upgrade our airports. The other part of our economic growth plan is to invest in people. The beauty of what Labor is suggesting, the vision under our plan, which we are trusting the Australian people with by telling them what we are going to do as we should. Imagine if we are a country where every three and four year old actually gets kindergarten. Fifteen hours a week, forty weeks a year. That just means they get the best start in life. That's world's best practice, it's only just good enough for Australia. Imagine if we are a country that puts back the $14 billion that the current government promised for public schools but never did. Imagine if every kid can go to a school regardless of their postcode, regardless of the wealth of their parents, the size of the school, get a quality education. Imagine if you're a parent of a child with a disability and you don't get treated like a bully merely because you demand for a fair go for your child. Imagine if we have 200,000 more people going to university in the next 10 years. Imagine if we can restore the 150,000 apprenticeships, traineeships, which have disappeared under the current government. Why don't we in this country have a debate about how can we be the best in the world? Imagine if a million Australian households actually get real help, $1000, $1500, $2000 a year to help with their childcare subsidies. And imagine if we were a country who doesn't desert our pensioners. Three million people are on the Commonwealth seniors health card or indeed on a pension, full or part. Imagine if we as a country decide that we are going to invest in the dental health of our older Australians. That's the sort of country which will grow into the future and where we see the fair go, not just for the top, but for everyone.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on religious freedom what do you say to schools like this one about your promise to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to stop them from choosing the teachers of religious faith that they want to and also what do you say to Mr Morrison about that issue.

SHORTEN: Well Miranda I know you've followed this issue extensively so thank you for your work on this topic. For me I've never been one who's been sectarian. And I think if you spoke to the Catholic Education Commissions around Australia they would agree that Tanya and I have been very good to work with. And so where that leaves your question is this. We don't think you should discriminate against people because of their sexuality. And I don't think most people do. And most people in the church accept that they've been working through these issues and it's working okay. But I also respect the right of parents to send their children to a school based upon the faith and the values taught in it. We will work through every issue. We will work through every issue. When I spoke to Bishops and leaders of churches, they agree. They don't want to see little children discriminated against. We will work through these issues. What I don't want to see is religion becoming a political football. That is why Labor led the case to make sure that the Catholic and low-fee Christian schools got their funding restored. My problem is of course that the government hasn't followed through with the government schools. We will work through this Miranda because I understand in Australia that it's not a question of majorities dictating to minorities. This country works best when we work together.

JOURNALIST: Do we need a religious discrimination Act in Australia.

SHORTEN: I'm not sure we do. But having said that we will always keep talking to people about it. I don't think anyone should be persecuted because of their faith. What I do also think is that if we are going to talk about priorities in this country - three million Aussie pensioners don't need to be forgotten in this election. Do you know the number of times I walk around in the community and the pensioners come up. These aren't people with a million dollars in shares and getting all the franking credits for not paying tax. I'm talking about three million battlers. And so many elections people have said what's in it for the pensioner? Now I know Mr Morrison says he indexes it every six months. Well every government does that. That's like giving yourself a medal for getting up in the morning. The real issue is what are we going to do extra for pensioners. And I'm making it very clear just as I've said this election is a referendum on wages, just because this election needs to be about real change in climate. This election also needs to be about you know cost of living and childcare. This election needs to be about our pensioners. And I and my united team, we're not going on with the antics of Palmer, Hanson et al. We've been doing the homework over the last six years and because of our economic reforms I can promise every pensioner in Australia, pensioners worried about their oral hygiene, their health, the cleaning, the costs of looking after their teeth. If you vote Labor at this election, we'll make sure in Medicare you've got up to $1,000 every two years for the rest of your life to make sure that you can have at least a fair go at having proper dental hygiene. Thanks everybody we'll see at the next gig.

ENDS

MELITA MARKEY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR STIRLING: So good morning, everybody. My name's Melita Markey, I'm the federal Labor candidate for Stirling and it's a real thrill to have Bill and Tanya with us here at the Good Start early learning centre here in Nollamara, I really want to thank the beautiful staff here, Kylie, Emma and Todd, the head of Good Start for Australia, who have really welcomed us and helped us get to see the great work that's being done here. I have a bit of history with this child care centre and Good Start centres. I worked for Mission Australia back in 2009, when we actually purchased Good Start centres with the view of bringing social inclusion into the communities and working through child care centres to build capacity for families and young people. And it's so fantastic to come back here and see what a wonderful job they're doing and to hear about Bill's wonderful announcement for child care and child care workers. Thank you, Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Melita. I want to thank Good Start too and it's great to be back in Perth with Tanya Plibersek. Tonight is debate night - I'm really looking forward to a positive debate, outlining competing visions for what we can do to help the Australian people. But it is all about choices. Today I make very clear that the Labor Party chooses to look after the childcare costs of a million Australian households rather than unsustainable tax loopholes at the top end of town. It's all about a choice. A choice between a united, stable Labor team, led by myself, supported by my Deputy Leader Tanya Plibersek and Melita Markey here or the divided ramshackle coalition of the unwilling, led by Mr Morrison, and Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. This is a very unstable coalition of cuts and chaos in Canberra and it needs to stop. But Labor is not just focused on them. As I said, we have got exciting offerings to help Australian families with the cost of childcare. I was really pleased yesterday in Melbourne to announce that because of the serious economic decisions we've made, we can afford to provide the single best improvement assisting families, Australian households with the cost of their childcare in many years. We are saying to Australian families, whose household incomes are up to $174,000, that we will help improve the subsidy that you receive to help you pay the cost of your childcare. Effectively, this will mean between about a $2100 per family to about $1400 per family at the upper end. This is really good news, because why should women have to go to work, earn all the money, just to see it all end up in childcare costs. We've also announced the single most significant improvement to early childhood educators' wages. The system is failing. Early childhood educators are the first adults to which we trust our kids, and yet they are underpaid. The parents know it, the community knows it, everybody knows it. We also propose putting in measures to control prices. We don't want to look after families and the early childhood educators to see the fees miraculously increase by the amount which we're providing to support the teachers and to support the parents. I just want to close on reminding everyone that yesterday as well, it wasn't just good news for Australian families. It was good news for pensioners. I've already been inundated by pensioners since our announcement who say every election there's nothing for the pensioners. Well, that stops today. We are saying to 2.6 million aged pensioners, to over 380,000 people on the Commonwealth health seniors card, that we want to help you with the cost of your dental care. There's 185,000 people right now, older Australians, putting off getting dental care because it's too expensive. Well, Labor has got a proposition for every pensioner in Australia, that when you need health with your teeth, and your oral hygiene is so important to your health generally, we'll be there. We're going to create new support within our Medicare system so that every two years, pensioners, three million of them, will get an additional $1000 to help with the cost of going to see the dentist. Labor is in touch with middle class, working class people and people on the pension. We understand that if we can help with the cost of child care, if we can help with the early childhood educators, if we can help keep prices down generally and we can help with pensioners, then millions of Australians are going to be better off if they vote Labor on May 18.  I'd now like to hand over to Tanya to talk a bit more about our exciting vision for restoring the fair go for millions of Australians.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, thanks so much Bill. We know that when parents are leaving their precious babies and children outside the family, at a childcare centre, at an early learning centre, they worry about two things. They worry about the quality of the care and they worry that it's affordable for the family budget. I have so many families talking to me, about the fact that they wonder whether it's cost effective to go back to work, whether it's worth it, because childcare fees chew up so much of the family budget. Women in particular, say to me, look I don't know if I should go from two days to four days, I don't know whether I should go back now or wait until the kids are at school because child care, for many families, it is the biggest expense they've got after the rent or mortgage. So yesterday's announcement, which means up to $2100 more support for families, per child, per year, will make a huge difference to the family budget. Particularly if you've got two or even three children that are under school age.  The other thing, of course, that families look for is quality in early learning. Nobody is going to leave their child with carers that they're not confident of. And we've been here today at this fantastic early learning centre. I visit childcare centres all over Australia. I see the skill of the work that's being done in those centres. I see the complexity of the work. I see the qualifications of the people doing that work. And there is no way you can convince me or the parents who are leaving their kids here that these workers don't deserve a pay rise. They deserve a pay rise. Because of the skill, because of the complexity, because of their qualifications. Because of the way that families rely on the care and the early learning opportunities in these centres. Nobody in Australia believes these workers don't deserve a pay rise. The question is who is going to pay for it? Parents can't afford extra fees. So it is simply the fact that a Shorten Labor Government would gladly assist with the cost of improving early childhood educators' wages because someone has to do it. The turnover in the sector is too high. The people who work in this sector can't afford to raise families themselves. I talk to early childhood educators who are still living at home with their parents well into their late twenties because they are worried they can't afford the rent or a mortgage because of their very low wages. People leave this sector and go into lower skilled work because it pays better. We can't afford to lose those skilled workers from this sector because of their very low wages. So, great news for families that are getting extra help with child care fees. And great news for our early childhood educators who do such important work raising up the next generation of Australians. Thanks.

JOURNALIST:  On childcare, Mr Shorten why are you keeping the activity test in place which means that families in which women decide not to work won't get access to this? Previously, Amanda Rishworth has been opposed to the activity test, so why are you keeping it in place, and what's the review of the activity test going to achieve?

SHORTEN: I will get Tanya to supplement this but let's go to some of the macro numbers here. This Government when it talks about childcare, cut people's childcare and other people got an improvement. Under our new scheme, no one goes backwards. So, just to repeat the good news for Australian families. A family household income up to $68,000 will get 100 per cent subsidy up to the capped hours, be it $11.77. One hundred per cent. That's free childcare. A family household between $68,000 and $100,000, they'll get around 85 per cent subsidy which is also very good news and an improvement on the status quo. That will save them $1500 or so every year. That is per child. So for a couple of kids, $3K. That's not to be sneezed at. Then family household incomes between $100,000 and $174,000, the subsidy will taper down but it is still more generous than what the current Coalition is offering working families. So it will be from 85 per cent to 60 per cent. That will be a benefit of between $1200 and $1400 for families. I'll get Tanya to supplement.
 
PLIBERSEK: Thank you. It is actually a very good question. I guess there are two main areas of difference between us and the Government when it comes to early childhood education. The first is we have committed to universal access to preschool for three year olds as well as four year olds. That will continue forever if Labor is elected. At the moment you've got a Morrison government that's only promised one more year of preschool for four year olds. They've been rolling over preschool funding year after year. Centres can't plan. Community organisations that want to build new preschools can't build them because they don't know whether the funding is going to be there in 2021 or 2022 or 2023. We actually need to make this permanent commitment because we know that 90 per cent of a child's brain development takes place before the age of five. Investing in 15 hours a week of universal access to preschool for three year olds as well as four year olds is critical to making sure our children start school school-ready. So that's one very important difference.

When the Liberals changed the child care arrangements previously, about a quarter of families were actually made worse off. Some of those families were on very high incomes but many of them were on very low incomes. We are very concerned that a number of those children who would benefit from early childhood education are missing out on it. We've seen a very substantial drop in the number of children from disadvantaged families that are using childcare and we do need to look at how we can offer early learning opportunities for those kids who would really benefit from a few hours a week of childcare, even if their parents aren't working. It is a flaw in the system as it is being administered at the moment. We've spoken to early childhood educators, the centre operators and they tell us that a lot of their disadvantaged families have dropped out. We need to get to the bottom of this and we have committed to reviewing the arrangements for those disadvantaged families should we be elected.

JOURNALIST: Just to clarify though, Mr Shorten, would you like to see the activity test eventually scrapped following this review?
 
SHORTEN: I thought Tanya answered that. The point is that the Government, they can't help themselves because they are so busy defending the top end of town with their unsustainable tax cuts, they try and do all the good policies on the cheap. How is it they came up with a childcare policy, which in order to see three families benefit, knocked off the fourth family? We've said we will review that. We want to see how that's working. We are not convinced it's working well. But the good news for Australian families, to cut through the clutter and white noise of the election, if childcare matters to you, if you're worried that your household budget is being knocked around by the cost of childcare, Labor is so far ahead of the Coalition in our offerings on childcare, just not funny.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you promised a pay rise for childcare workers, why not single out workers in other low paid industries and give them a similar pay rise? If not, could that not open the flood gates for union claims for pay rises in other sectors?
 
SHORTEN: There are a number of points in that but I'll be as brief as I can. I think you're right, Olivia. Everything is going up in Australia except people's wages. Wages are stagnating. That's a fact. This government has broken the sort of records no government should ever want to break in terms of low wages growth. That's a problem. In terms of how we help workers get wage rises in a modest and meaningful way, we've already suggested a number of policies in the course of last week. The Government is suspiciously silent on raising wages. Of course, we're in the home state of Mathias Cormann who famously said low wages is the economic architecture of Liberals, so they're happy. But we have picked childcare workers to go first. I think this is a strategically important industry. We talk a lot about the national interest but what could be more in the national interest than the quality care and education of our zero to five year olds? That is pretty important. These are the first workers, the first adults in our children's lives we trust outside the family unit and they work hard. The lovely lady Emma who we just spoke to before. Eleven years in the industry, two years here. She has plenty of friends who come in with the best hopes in the world but the money is so crap, the money is so bad, that they have had to sacrifice their passion just to make ends meet. We're going to change that. So we have deliberately said that we think the early childhood educators is an area where the normal system is not working. If you're in the private sector, say you're in the media or say you're in mining or say you're in, I don't know, manufacturing. You can go and bargain with your boss to try to get a wage rise. But the fact of the matter is childcare has a lot of government funding so when the government funding is tight there is simply no money for the wage rise. So, if you like, childcare workers are caught in a Catch-22 by the economics of childcare. If we don't put more money into the industry then you can never get a wage rise. But if you can never get a wage rise, we keep churning the good workers. So what we've come up with is a policy which is not dissimilar to what was done when Labor was last in government for housing, community sector workers, where you pick industries where they are predominantly feminised. In this case, did you know childcare is 96 per cent women so it's no coincidence that their the pay is low because that's the sort of in-built bias in the system. What we've said is we will find money in an orderly manner across ten years, or across eight years I think we've spelt out. Then, we'll sit down with the employers, with the industry, with the parents, with the independent umpire and work out how we can do it. But what we bring to the table is good will. And more than good will, we are willing to find money. This is a government who is willing to find $77 billion - although they haven't told us where it is coming from, what cuts they are going to make - to pay for a tax cut for the top three per cent. We've explained how we're raising our money. We've been upfront with the people for the last three years and this is the dividend of these reforms. Everyone knows wages in early childhood are too low. Parents know it. Industry knows it. If any of you have got kids, you'd know it too. But there hasn't been a proper answer until now. We can't just ask the parents to pay more. They are already struggling with the bills. The industry is a hybrid of for-profit and not-for-profit. They don't have the money to give significant wage rises. The other alternative is we can just keep going along asking childcare workers to subsidise the children by not getting wage rises. We've come up with a neat solution and it makes sense. There is some precedent and we'll work through it in a calm ...
 
JOURNALIST: You have repeated your line that everything is going up except your wages. If most workers in Australia don't get a pay rise, will your first term have been a failure?
 
SHORTEN: We haven't won the election, yet.
 
JOURNALIST: But if you do.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you for that optimism. I believe our policies will see sensible movements in wages. This nation can't keep bumping along at the bottom in terms of wages. I know, for example, that we will reverse these unfair cuts, arbitrary cuts to penalty rates. That will mean that hundreds of thousands of people will get a wage rise. I know our plan here for early childhood educators will see in our first term modest and sensible increases. I know that when we improve the bargaining laws, that will crack down on sham contracting, we will stamp out the abuse of temporary work visas from overseas. I have been around this business for 30 years. I understand what we have got to do to get wages moving again and we will. But it will be done with business, it will be done recognising capacity to pay. But you know we have got a big problem in Australia. Confidence is flat. We're seeing household savings being spent. We saw zero per cent inflation in the last quarter. That shows you that people are just basically hunkering down under this Liberal Government. What we need is a bit of confidence back in the system and that is what we will bring to Australia.
 
JOURNALIST: On preferences, you made your feelings about Clive Palmer very clear. Why is one of your candidates in Tasmania Julie Collins preferences his candidates second?
 
SHORTEN: I'm not aware of that. In terms of Mr Palmer, why is to hard for billionaires to pay the taxpayers the money they owe them? Why is it that there is one rule for the rest of us and another rule for him and Scott Morrison? If you owed the Government $10,000, for longer than a year, the Tax Office would give you a ring, wouldn't they? They might  give you a letter. They will chase you up. But apparently in this country if you owe $70 million to the taxpayer not only does the Government not worry about it - it wants your preferences. In fact it wants to elect you to the Senate. it's a whole new strategy in Australian politics. I am lucky enough to have Tanya here, she's been giving this matter quite a degree of reflection.
 
PLIBERSEK: Thanks Bill. I have been thinking a lot about Scott Morrison and Clive Palmer and the conclusion I have come to is they're just the same. Scott Morrison can afford to protect every tax loophole for the top end of town but he can't afford to pay childcare workers properly. Clive Palmer can afford to put his face on every billboard in the country, but he can't afford to pay his workers that he ripped off at Queensland Nickel properly. They're peas in a pod. What really worries me, is that Scott Morrison is so desperate he's prepared to put his arm around Clive Palmer to do a deal, to try and cling desperately onto power. But what is in it for Clive Palmer? What deal has Scott Morrison made? We know that Clive Palmer does nothing for people without expecting some return on his investment. What's the deal here? You've got Scott Morrison backing Clive Palmer to get into the Senate. What does that mean? It means more cuts and more chaos and it's incredible that Scott Morrison should be prepared to inflict those cuts and chaos on Australians just to cling desperately to power.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just on this issue of Clive Palmer, the Newspoll today seems to suggest his popularity is on the rise. If you do win the election next month and Palmer does hold some sort of sway in the Senate, do you think you will be able to negotiate with him and get your agenda through, which is fairly ambitious?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the election hasn't been decided yet. But having said that, we'll deal with whatever the Australian people give us in the Senate. But if Clive Palmer gets into the Senate, I blame Scott Morrison. Because the only way that bloke can be on electoral life support is because the Liberal and National Party are putting him there. This is turning Australian politics into a joke, isn't it? Let's go back to the fundamentals. Mr Morrison was the Treasurer who repaid Mr Palmer's $70 million worth of debts to the workers and that therefore means Mr Palmer owes the Government that $70 million. But instead of getting the $70 million out of Clive Palmer, Clive Palmer said, "I will give you my preferences." And all of a sudden when Clive Palmer was the sort of bad guy in the Liberal dictionary, all of a sudden, get the preferences, he's a good guy, don't bother me about his debts. So in the Senate we have got to stop it feeding the extremists. The problem is now that the Morrison Government is so desperate that when you vote for Scott Morrison you're voting for the Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government. Australians are sick of the circus of Australian politics. A vote for Mr Morrison pretty much guarantees Mr Palmer in the Senate, Ms Hanson in the Senate and more chaos for three years. Vote Labor in the House and vote Labor in the Senate to avoid more chaos and confusion.
 
JOURNALIST: The Northern Territory candidate Wayne Kurnoth has posted some questionable social media posts. How worried are you in the Northern Territory practices that he was pre-selected?
 
SHORTEN: Well I am not sure that the people who preselected him knew of all of these posts. But I don't think he should be our candidate. Just before we all shout ... So I don't think he should be our candidate any more and I understand that it is in train for him to step down as our candidate. And I hope that Mr Palmer is willing to do something about the 20 candidates he has got with Constitutional eligibility clouds over their heads. And I hope that Mr Morrison can show the same certainty of purpose as I've just displayed.
 
JOURNALIST: Should the CFMEU be suing Victorian Police for blocking them from inspecting a work site?
 
SHORTEN: That is going to be a matter between them and the police. I don't know anything about it. When it comes to adhering to the law though I want to make it clear, no one is above the law, not the CFMEU, not their officials, nor the banks. And always remember that our friend the current Prime Minister voted 26 times to cover up the banks' behaviour, voted 26 times against a banking royal commission. And indeed your question goes to the heart of making sure we have got a better trust in the system. That's why we need a national integrity commission. And I do not know why Western Australian Attorney-General Christian Porter keeps resisting having an anti-corruption commission. Perhaps one more question.
 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask on mining, do you support Tanya's view yesterday, you said that Indian mining companies are not capable of providing jobs in Queensland?
 
PLIBERSEK: Yesterday?
 
JOURNALIST: Not yesterday, the other day. Do you support that and what is your stance on Adani?
 
SHORTEN: You're not reporting accurately what Tanya said. But in terms of mining, you in fact do remind me kindly of our announcement about the future of mining. Today Jason Clare and I have announced and I guess it is a good news story so not as exciting but it is a $75 million commitment to invest in the future of mining. Did you know in Australia that we haven't had a tier 1 mining discovery since 2005? That is tier 1, very high quality, underground. The rest of the world has reported three tier 1 discoveries every year. Did you know about $221 billion that we make in mining exports, 80 per cent of it comes from mining deposits which were discovered 40 years ago. We don't properly map underground Australia. So Labor is putting in $75 million to help work with geoscience, work with the mining industry so we can exploit our mineral deposits. Another good bit of news is we are putting in $2 million to fund 50 mining engineering scholarships in Western Australia.

JOURNALIST: Just on wages Mr Shorten you said before that childcare workers would be the first. Are we looking at a raft of almost unprecedented government intervention in getting wage rises and will other industries expect it?
 
SHORTEN: I don't mind repeating what I said earlier, because it is an important point so I appreciate your giving me the chance to do that. No I don't see this as being economy-wide this approach, at all. But I do accept that in certain sectors of the economy we have a wages problem, don't we? And I would put it to you, childcare educators, there is only four things that can be done. One, they just never get a pay rise. Well that's not good is it? I think you would agree with that. Thirty per cent turnover, very important the development of kids. Two, we ask the parents to pay a lot more. That's not really viable either is it with the cost of living crisis under this government? Three we just ask all the operators to increase their costs, to not pass it on to anyone. That's not economically rational or reasonable either. Or four, the Government assists, provide money to the childcare sector so that workers can get better wages. This is a problem everybody acknowledges. If all of us agree that childcare wages are too low and if I did a quick survey here of all of you, is $21 or $22 or $23 an hour, really is it enough for someone with a Cert. III or Diploma in childcare? You and I know it is not enough.

JOURNALIST: It's not isolated though.
 
SHORTEN: You asked the question and I am giving you an answer. So if we know there is a problem, it's then a matter of choices. And that is what this election is about. It's about choices. Today across Australia the pre-poll voting is opening. It's estimated that up to 40 per cent of people will vote before May 18. So I say to people who have to vote at pre-poll today, tomorrow or in the next three weeks, this election is about a choice. You can either give billions of dollars to negative gearing and property investors or you can properly fund early childhood educators' wages. You can either give billions of dollars away by not policing loopholes for the top end of town or you can provide $2000 to middle class families struggling with the cost of childcare. This election is about choices and we are making choices. I want to clamp down on unsustainable tax subsidies for the top end of town. And do you know what? I want three million Aussie pensioners to be able to know that they can get a decent set of teeth and afford to go to the dentist. Thank you, see you around.  

UHLMANN: Now, you’re pledging to spend a lot of money through this campaign. This morning, $4 billion. This time on childcare over four years. Can you tell us who benefits?
 
SHORTEN: About a million Australian families will benefit from our initiative on child care. Everywhere I’ve travelled in Australia as Opposition Leader, one of the single biggest problems that people tell me is that everything is going up except their wages and child care is in one of the biggest things which is going up in price. It has gone up 24 per cent in the last six years. So what’s happening is mum and dad go to work and most of mum's wages are just going to pay the child care. So what we’re doing is we have made economic reform decisions to make sure that we spend more money helping people with the cost of child care and our proposals today, specifically for nearly a million families, mean somewhere between $1,500 and $2,100 back to families which they are currently spending on child care.
 
UHLMANN: Why won't child care providers just whack up their fees?
 
SHORTEN: Well good point. We are keeping an eye on this. We’ve asked the ACCC - as we give the subsidy to the parents we don't want the operators saying hmmm, yummy, we like that $2,000 subsidy we’ll increase the cost of fees. So first of all the ACCC is going to have the powers to monitor it. But if that doesn’t work I'm putting on the table today on your show we will look at introducing price controls like we do for private health insurers. I think that we want the money to go to parents, not to see more profit being gouged by particular operators.
 
UHLMANN: More money going to wages for childcare workers. Isn't that a reason for whacking up their fees?
 
SHORTEN: Well come along to Box Hill today where we’re going to talk more about how we are going to look after early childhood educators. Early childhood educators, it is a 96 per cent female dominated industry. I think that it is paid less than other male dominated industries because there are so many women working in it. You know it is a most important job. These are the first adults who we trust our kids to out of the family unit, so I think we should pay early childhood educators more. You will hear more about that later.
 
UHLMANN: If you put in price controls how can their wages go up?
 
SHORTEN: Well what we can do is we can make sure that if we are going to provide some support for the wages of early childhood educators, again we will say to the operators if Labor is providing some modest improvement in the wages of childhood educators, if Labor is providing a couple of thousand dollars a year for parents, what we say to the childcare operators is you don't get to pocket that. We want childcare to be sustainable, we want cost of living to be tackled and we want to see that the people working in the industry get a fair deal.
 
UHLMANN: Isn’t the problem though that you’re trying to give something to everyone, and everyone can’t benefit. In the end someone has to pay for this and in this case it will be those childcare providers who will get less money?
 
SHORTEN: No, not at all. What’s happening now is that this government is raising record taxes and they spend it on property investors on their sixth house with negative gearing. This is a government who is not tough on multinationals paying their fair share. Instead of being slack on the multinationals, instead of giving away unsustainable tax giveaways to property investors to buy their sixth house, we want to use that money to help subsidise the child care industry so that parents on the front line get cost of living relief.
 
UHLMANN: Let's go to that. How much are you raising in taxes over the next decade. The Government says $387 billion. What's your figure?
 
SHORTEN: Well we’ll release our figures before the election is concluded, but we’ve also made clear that we think we need to wind back what we give to negative gearing.
 
UHLMANN: You should know some of this now though, what you are raising in negative gearing and capital gains tax, what you’re doing in franking credits, so could you give us a figure over if not the next 10 years, over the next four years as to what you expect to raise.
 
SHORTEN: We will do that closer to the election but suffice to say we have done our maths and we are able to pay for the promises we are making. Once we have revealed all of our promises, then we will reveal the costings to back it up.
 
UHLMANN: I understand that, but some of this stuff would be well known to you by now because these are policies you have been working on for six years so can you give us a figure on what you intend to raise by way of cutting tax concessions and raising taxes over the next 10 years?
 
SHORTEN: We will once we have announced all of our policies. That will be very soon. But the point about it is that there are tens of billions of dollars going in unsustainable tax concessions, tens of billions of dollars. We think it is a better investment, rather than giving a subsidy to someone to buy their sixth house to spend it on child care relief for a million Australian families.
 
UHLMANN: OK, if you won't or can't give us a figure on what you are raising in taxes, well can you tell people today whose taxes are going to rise in order to pay for these programs?
 
SHORTEN: That's a really good point. First of all, the government loves to say that if we are not going to give a tax subsidy to a property investor, somehow that’s a property tax. It’s not. What currently happens in negative gearing - and first of all, anyone who is currently invested under negative gearing rules won't be affected. So it is a future change. What happens is when the government gives a subsidy, a reward for investing in your sixth or seventh property, that's an expenditure. That means we are using tax income and we are giving it to a property investor for making a loss. Instead of giving that tax money to a property investor for making a loss, I would rather give it to parents. So it is not an increase in tax. What it actually is, is it’s a reallocation of priorities. I want to give it to …
 
UHLMANN: So you’re saying it’s a big transfer of wealth from people’s pockets into government’s pocket. Why would you spend it any better than they will?

SHORTEN: Well it’s a matter of priorities. This is the truth in Australia at the moment. If you have a lot of capital you’re taxed very lightly. If you earn income you’re taxed much more heavily. What I want to do is to have a fairer, equitable system. Instead of just giving the property investors and the multinationals a lighter deal what we want to do is to use some of that money which we’re giving to them and reallocate it to spend it on child care. I would rather see a million Australian families, households whose incomes are less than $170,000 a year, get a couple of thousand dollars of tax relief than give that money either through slack tax laws to multinationals or through giving it to property investors. It is a matter of priorities.
 
UHLMANN: Isn’t it a matter of priorities that you also then let people know as soon as possible where this money is coming from, because you are actually arguing for very big change in Australia and people have the right to have enough time to know where that money is coming from and where it is going to.
 
SHORTEN: Well, the fact of the matter is we are arguing for a change in Australia. We don't want to - I mean, I think this Government is disgraceful in that they are offering a thread-bare policy agenda. All they are offering Australians is basically an unfunded tax cut in five years’ time, more of this trickle-down economics where the wealthy get wealthier and maybe a few crumbs come off the table for working families in this country. By contrast, we are saying let's change our tax system. Let’s stop giving money away to the top end of town. Let's start spending on the vast bulk of working, middle class.
 
UHLMANN: It's a big change and it's a big risk. Why should people trust you with that change?

SHORTEN: Because for the last three years, and indeed six years, we have been united. We are putting all our policies out there. You know you say you have got to give everything by the end of the election. We will. But the point about it is, we are putting out a lot of significant policies. We have been upfront with the people. We told people three years ago we intend to change the negative gearing rules, prospectively. We told people that we wanted to go after multinationals.

UHLMANN: Let's assume people weren't focused though, for example when you get asked through the course ...

SHORTEN: You can't have it all ways, you can't say when will you tell people ...

UHLMANN: But when you were asked during the course of the campaign are you lifting taxes on super you should say yes, shouldn't you?

SHORTEN: Well I've explained that I didn't understand the question that was being asked.

UHLMANN: But you were asked about whether or not workers on over $180,000 are going to pay more tax, that's true too isn't it?

SHORTEN: Let's go through each of those points rather than rapid fire, let's have a conversation. First of all, we have outlined our policies for the last three years. Now you say people haven't been paying attention, fair enough, that's your view. But you can't say that we haven't been upfront. Then you have gone to a couple of specific examples. Now when we talk about tax relief, the fact of the matter is that for the next three years, Liberal and Labor are offering the same deal to Australian people but where the disagreement comes is this government is ...

UHLMANN: Sorry I will stop you there because you are not. If you are earning more than $180,000 a year, you are going to lift people's taxes, aren't you?

SHORTEN: Yes, for the vast bulk of people we are offering the same thing. You are quite right, for the three per cent of tax earners we still think we need a budget repair levy until 22-23. So you are right there. But the point about it is if we are going to have a proper tax system in the country, we've got to start looking after income earners as opposed to taxing capital lightly and income more heavily. Or to put in plain English, how on earth are we a country who has the negative gearing rules or tax credit rules on shares which are unique in the world. I don't want to be the best in the world at tax loopholes, I want to be the best in the world at cost of living relief for childcare and for kinder and for aged care and for schools and hospitals.

UHLMANN: A couple of other questions, were you aware of anyone at all who is acting on Labor's behalf who was talking about preference deals with Clive Palmer? Were you aware of anyone in the Labor Party or in the union movement that was talking on your behalf?

SHORTEN: There couldn't have been anyone who was committing me to a preference deal. No, not aware of that. There is always conversations ...

UHLMANN: Not committing you to but starting conversations about the possibility of a preference deal.

SHORTEN: Hang on a second. As you would know as a seasoned journalist, there is always plenty of conversations. But you also understand, someone who has covered politics for a long time, that me and Labor, could not do a deal with a person who still owes the taxpayer nearly $70 million, owes workers an additional $7 million. That's a deal breaker for us.

UHLMANN: Did anyone...

SHORTEN: Only one leader in this country has done a deal with Clive Palmer.

UHLMANN: Absolutely. That's understood. But did anyone with your knowledge go and approach Clive Palmer? Did you know they were making those approaches?

SHORTEN: No. No. We are not doing that and let's be really clear here - there is no way that you can do a preference deal without me signing off on it. And somehow, though, what the Government is trying to do is look away from the deal they have done. There is one question which has not been satisfactorily answered. For Mr Morrison to give his preferences to Clive Palmer, for the Nationals, the Coalition partner, to give their preferences to One Nation, what have they promised Pauline Hanson and Clive Palmer? The reality is for Labor the price of doing a deal with Clive Palmer, too high. Not worth it.

UHLMANN: These are really good questions. Why don't you ask the Prime Minister himself on Nine News. We'll offer you a platform to do so, to go head to head with him. Why aren't you doing a prime time, head to head debate with the Prime Minister.

SHORTEN: Well first of all you know that we’ve offered Channel Nine the opportunity to do it through the Press Club. You have declined.

UHLMANN: No, that's not -

SHORTEN: You've declined. I am sorry if you are busy at lunchtime. The point about it is ...

UHLMANN: Why not prime time, that's when we have most eyes and ears.

SHORTEN: They have invented iView You know it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day -

UHLMANN: At night time -

SHORTEN: You know, it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day and replay it. I often see that. But the point about it is, ABC want a debate, Channel Nine want a debate, the Press Club want a debate. It's not really for me to sort out ...

UHLMANN: You've got a big program, why wouldn't you want to debate everyone and everywhere.

SHORTEN: Yeah, but do you know what? For the last six years we have been debating the Liberals. We are talking to the people. We've got three debates with the Government. I tell you what I do find extraordinary. I mean I can't sort out Nine and Two, I don't want to pick favourites. The point about it is we are going to Western Australia because they have never had a debate before. There is normally three debates in any federal election. That's the precedent. Let's go to the heart of the matter. If we want to talk about debate, where is their industrial relations minister to talk about wages policy? Where is their energy minister? Where is their environment minister talking about climate change? Where is their education minister? This is a Government where apart from Mr Morrison, they are silencing most of their colleagues.

UHLMANN: Bill Shorten, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for this debate.

SHORTEN: I enjoyed the debate.

UHLMANN: Right thanks mate.
 
SHORTEN: See you.

EDWINA BARTHOLOMEW: And Bill Shorten joins us live from Melbourne, good morning to you Mr Shorten. Let's get straight to the detail of this…

SHORTEN: Good morning Edwina.

BARTHOLOMEW: Who qualifies for the money? How much will they get and is it paid to parents or to child care centres?

SHORTEN: The subsidy will be for parents. If your household income is up to $68,000 we will provide a 100 per cent subsidy up to the capped amount of $11.77 an hour, so 100 per cent. If your household income is between $68,000 and $100,000, the subsidy is going to rise to 85 per cent of what you pay. And then between $100,000 and $174,000 the subsidy will be somewhere between 85 per cent down to 60 per cent. What this practically means is that for the first time after six long years of Liberal government where child care prices have gone up 24 per cent, where we hear stories of mums basically having to contribute most of their wage to their child care, this is a game-changer to help cost of living for nearly a million families, and it’s just going to make one of the biggest pressures on the family budget will be less.  In a real term, in a dollar term per year Edwina, it’s somewhere between $1,500 and $2,000 every year which families will have which won't be going on child care costs. That’s a real help to the family budget.

BARTHOLOMEW: That is a huge help. Mr Shorten on that last point is it paid to parents or to child care centres? How does it work?

SHORTEN: Well we want the subsidy to go to the parents and what we're going to say to child care operators though is that we don't want them ramping up the prices. I think this is important point to make. We get that if you provide greater support for parents, there might be some child care operators who miraculously increase the fees by the subsidy which we are providing. So we're going to ask the ACCC to monitor prices. And what’s more is that if we see that there is some rent-taking, profit-taking by the operators, well then what we're going to do is we're going to contemplate price controls. So in other words, before operators can increase fees, they’ve got to get the approval of the government. So we want to make sure that the money gets to the pockets of the families.

ZEMPILAS:  Alright Mr Shorten it sounds terrific, $1200 a year saved by almost a million working families. On the surface as I said sounds terrific -

SHORTEN: Up to $2000, yeah.

ZEMPILAS:  But where will the money come from? How are you going to pay for it?

SHORTEN: We can afford to do this because we are making the tough economic decisions. We want multinationals to pay more tax. We are winding back the money that we give and negative gearing to property investors. It is a very straightforward proposition. It is about a choice. Do we want to be a country who gives taxpayer subsidy to someone to buy their sixth investment property, or do we want to help everyday Aussie families, a million of them, with the cost of child care. My view is that investing in child care is a better investment than giving a tax reward to someone who is buying their, you know multiple investment properties. So that is how we pay for it.

BARTHOLOMEW: Lots of families will be looking at that policy very closely this morning. I want you to have a look at this one, the Coalition is this morning announcing that it will cap Australia's refugee intake  at around 19,000 - that's half of Labor's planned increase. They say over-population, city congestion are the reasons. We’ve seen past elections turn on the issue of immigration. Do you think this could be a vote-winner for the Coalition.

SHORTEN: Well under Scott Morrison, immigration has gone up, not down. I mean, this is politics. It is not about migration. Did you know Edwina that in Australia this year alone under the Liberals, there are 1.6 million people from overseas with visas which allow them to work in Australia, 1.6 million. So, Mr Morrison if he was fair dinkum would be talking about that and how we train Australians to do the jobs, rather than rely on 1.6 million people from overseas who have got visas which give them work rights. This is about politics, it’s not about migration. Pure politics.

ZEMPILAS:  Alright Mr Shorten you both get the chance to be fair dinkum tomorrow across in Perth, the first leaders’ debate being broadcast on the Seven Network tomorrow and we’ll see you there.

SHORTEN: Look forward to it, cheerio.

ROSS HART, MEMBER FOR BASS: Thank you everybody for coming here to Western Junction, Launceston Airport, which is the home of the Royal Flying Doctor Service, here in Tasmania. This is their aeromedical base. Great to welcome my colleague Brian Mitchell and of course, Bill Shorten, Leader of the Opposition, for a very important announcement today. I'm always very pleased to have Bill here in northern Tasmania because my constituents know that it is vitally important to elect a federal Labor government. It is vitally important that we deliver extra funding for health. This is part of our core commitment towards health here in Tasmania. The Liberals have cut $35 million from health in Tasmania. Labor is putting that back. Labor is making the additional investments not just here in Bass with additional investments for mental health, $15 million for mental health, but important infrastructure with respect to the RFDS. Their Aeromedical Transfer Station here is very important as part of an integrated investment in health in Tasmania. Welcome, Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon, everyone. Before we start, I'm happy to take questions in this case from the local media. We've had a national press conference. I'm here today to announce that because of Ross Hart's advocacy, supported by Brian Mitchell, a Labor government, if we're elected on May 18, will invest $7 million into the Royal Flying Doctor Service here in Tasmania. Just a little bit of background of what the RFDS does in Tassie. As you'd be aware the Royal Flying Doctor Service celebrated its 90th anniversary last year and they've been in Tassie now since 1960. They perform a very important function in terms of healthcare in Tassie. From the Bass Strait islands to the more remote communities. People should realise that whilst Tasmania geographically is not as large as some of the mainland states there are a lot of remote locations. The RFDS has been an important part of providing proper healthcare in this area. But it needs some more money. It needs to be properly integrated into the health system which Tasmanians receive elsewhere. So this $7 million will go to upgrading the hangar facilities. It will go towards providing better mental health, better dental health, better support of a whole range of local government areas. This $7 million courtesy of Ross Hart's advocacy is part of Labor's ongoing commitment to make sure that Tasmanians enjoy the same quality of healthcare in Tasmania that people on the mainland enjoy. Over to some local questions.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Are you concerned that people in northern Tasmania’s arts community might feel dudded by the $50 million MONA pledge and see it effectively as a handout to a wealthy entrepreneur in the state's south?

SHORTEN: In my experience, people in the arts community throughout Australia are always pleased when the arts gets a lift anywhere. So, I don't think that people do begrudge MONA. That has been a private investment which has never relied on any federal support. Our investment we are providing Tasmanian tourism is $120 million. $50 million of that will be to MONA for public spaces, amphitheatres and the like. Tasmania has got a world class arts and tourism story to tell and we want to make sure that flagship ventures like MONA can be used to attract people to Tassie. When people come to Tasmania they don't just go to the south. Labor will certainly work with the local arts community to further develop projects in the north and the north west.

JOURNALIST: Have you been approached to fund or are you considering funding aerobridges for Hobart and Launceston airports and improving commuter safety.

SHORTEN: We've provided some funding in our policies for Hobart airport. What we're doing in terms of providing greater support for infrastructure in Tassie though is quite extensive. From the Bass Highway through to the bridge through to a range of different projects. I don't have any specific knowledge of an approach about an aerobridge but again we are in a position to talk to Tasmania about infrastructure because we have made the serious economic reform decisions. We are not going to give money to multinationals. We would rather see Tasmanians receive their fair share. And if I might make the point, not about aerobridges but about health,  Labor's really proud of the fact that of all the things we are doing in Tasmania we think the fact that we are providing over $100 million specifically for health projects in Tasmania is exactly what Tasmanians are looking for. You shouldn't have to wait longer in Tasmania for elective surgery than you do in parts of the mainland. That's why we are very pleased with our $30 million to help blitz waiting lists in Tasmania. When you add that on to the $15 million mental health hub we are doing in Launceston, when you look at the $4.5 million we are doing for Tazreach to supply services in North Western Tasmania. Add that on top of the fact that Tasmania has had $35 million cut from its hospitals, including local hospitals here in Launceston. We are going to put all of that money back. Add that to the fact that we are going to tackle the out of pocket costs of people seeing the GPs. Add to that our $2.8 billion national hospital fund which will see Tasmanian hospitals receive greater support and add to that our $2.3 billion support to help tackle the out of pocket costs for cancer patients. Tasmanians, the best health offering for them comes from an elected Labor government in Canberra.

JOURNALIST: The Greens came to Launceston yesterday and they announced their national health policy and they are looking to see dental care included under Medicare. Do you have a response to that?

SHORTEN: There is no doubt that oral hygiene is an important part of a person's health. It was Labor who pioneered the child dental benefit services. I think that when you look at our health offerings though Labor has got the best offerings of the mainstream parties, indeed of the parties. The reality is we were down here in fact just a couple of days after Parliament rose, Ross and I and Catherine King announcing greater support for people going through the fight of their lives with cancer. So when you look at our hospital fund, when you look at the fact we are reversing cuts that this government has done to hospitals, when you look at our investment we are going to make in cancer treatment and helping with the out of pockets there. And of course our announcement today for the Royal Flying Doctor Service, Labor really is the party you can trust when it comes to the health of Tasmanians.

JOURNALIST: Will you work with the Greens though on more coverage?

SHORTEN: We will have a look at what everyone has to say. But I want to make it clear that if we form a government we will be a Labor government not an anything else government. Thank you everybody.

Andrew Moore	
Andrew Moore published this page in Bill's Transcripts 13 days ago

JULIE COLLINS, Shadow Minister for Ageing and Mental Health, 
MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN: Thank you. It’s terrific to be here with Bill Shorten the leader, but particularly on behalf of Ben McGregor the candidate for Clark, Brian Mitchell the federal member for Franklin and myself Julie Collins the federal member for Franklin. It's wonderful to also have Anthony Albanese and Tony Burke for this terrific announcement about Tasmania. People would know that Tasmania got hit particularity badly by bushfires earlier this year and we are starting to recover from that and today's announcement is really, really important about the future of Tasmania, about jobs in Tasmania and about recovery here in Tasmania. So I'll hand over to Bill to make the announcement.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: First of all, isn't this great to be at MONA. And it’s great to be here with David and Kirsha and the workforce here. MONA is just ... MONA is simply fun. Now I was saying to David as we walked down here “You know, is this world's best?” and he said “No, it's just fun.” But actually, I think that David is being a bit modest. Tasmanian tourism, with the flagship which is MONA, is not only leading in Australia, it's leading throughout the world. And it is fun. But what Labor wants to do, is we want to back in the future of Tasmanian tourism, and we want to back in the investment which has been made by private investors in MONA. Chloe and I came here for a 45th birthday last year with friends. It is a fabulous centrepiece of a visit to southern Tasmania. And when you think about MONA, it really is excellent and fun across the world. Paris may have the Louvre, you know you've got the Guggenheim, you've got other great international exhibits, but Australia, not just Tasmania, has got the MONA. This is fabulous. But the money which has been invested here has been all private inspiration. There's been no national support for a facility which is employing hundreds of people, and bringing, you know, tens and tens of thousands of tourists, not just to Tasmania, but to Australia. So I'm really pleased to announce, in part through the hard work of our tourism spokesperson, Anthony Albanese, and our Tasmanian Labor team, spearheaded by Julie Collins, that a Labor government if elected on May 18 will invest an additional $50 million in MONA, as part of a $120 million tourism package. The Tasmanian economy has many strings to its bow. But tourism is certainly, I think, one of the great job generators for Tasmania. Tasmanian tourism is famous across the mainland and famous across the world. If you've got people who are willing to back themselves and invest in such a marvellous facility and experience, then they need a government in Canberra as committed to Tasmania, as committed to tourism, as committed to fun, as the people here are. I'd now like to get Albo to talk further about the whole package of tourism announcements at this fabulous facility.
 
ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR Infrastructure, Transport, Cities and Regional Development & SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM: Thanks very much Bill, and it is indeed a very proud moment because I believe this is the most significant tourism package for any state from any federal government or opposition in Australia's history. $120 million, with MONA at the centrepiece, but also recognising that one of the things that MONA does for the 400,000 visitors who went through MONA in the last financial year, 70 per cent of whom were from interstate or internationally, is bring them here - this is the magnet - and then to spread the benefit throughout Tasmania. Particularly throughout the regions. So this package is comprehensive. It's been worked through, through four roundtables that I've had with the tourism sector here in Tasmania, having meetings in Launceston, at Cradle Mountain and here in Hobart. Freycinet will receive $10 million to improve the facilities there. Mt Field National Park, $5 million. Both of these pristine natural environments are suffering from the number of visitors who are coming through and we need to infrastructure to keep up with it, so that people can have a positive experience when they visit those destinations. As Julie said, Tasmania has been affected by the tragic bushfires in recent times. One of the areas that was damaged is the Tahune AirWalk, and we'll put $5 million to recuperate that area. The Agritas facility at Smithton, promoted last time we were in government, remains unused. $3 million there to fix up that facility on the north-west of Tasmania. The north-west coastal pathway, making sure that that experience can be benefited by all who visit as well as local residents. A number of rail trails and mountain bike trails including a new mountain bike trail at Dial Range Strategic Mountain. The world championships were held in north-west Tasmania recently. People coming from all over the world, bringing their families and friends, to enjoy that environment and to, of course, create jobs while they were there. Tourism trails throughout Tasmania, Beauty Point, to support infrastructure there as well. Together, this package, here at MONA, but right throughout Tasmania, will deliver jobs, will deliver economic activity and here at MONA of course, with the fact that our contribution is for the public infrastructure, things like the amphitheatre that will be  available to schools and people who have concerts. They're making available, courtesy of David Walsh, 7,000 manuscripts including manuscripts like of one of the originals of editions of Origin of the Species with a handwritten note from Charles Darwin. Other manuscripts including the original from Lolita. Manuscripts from a range of things right across the board, everything from Hunter S. Thompson to the classics. That being made available here through this contribution will mean that this goes from being the biggest magnet that we have for Australian tourism as a single entity to being even better in the future and I'm very proud of this package. And I want to thank the Tasmanian tourism sector for the way that they have engaged with us to make a difference to ensure that today we can make this comprehensive announcement. And I thank Bill Shorten for his support. As the tourism shadow minister, it's great to have a leader that is prepared to back in good ideas and good announcements like this.
 
SHORTEN: And in that spirit of congratulations I'll just acknowledge Bec White, Tasmanian Labor leader. She certainly convinced us of the importance of investing in Tasmanian tourism. I'm not sure her counterpart has had the same success today in convincing the current Prime Minister to back in Tassie like we are.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on the Indigenous voice to Parliament, if you go to the people without a fully formed model, does that open up the chance of a fear campaign? Does it make it harder to sell to the public? And on top of that, you're also planning a first term Republican plebiscite - is it too much? Is it too many things to sell with these big votes?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all I think it's long overdue for our First Australians to be in the nation's birth certificate, the Constitution. I think that we've left it too long. Now, what we will do is listen to the Uluru Statement from the Heart and we will argue the case for a voice. It will be a fully formed proposition. As for scare campaigns, we've already seen some in the right wing, in the extreme right wing already start to complain about including First Australians in the Constitution. We're up for the argument. In terms of an Australian head of state, yes Australia should have an Australian head of state. But we have said that what we want to have is the referendum on the voice first of all.
 
JOURNALIST: How much money has Labor set aside to help drought-proof our farmers?

SHORTEN: We've actually set quite a lot aside and without taking too long on this interview I congratulate the work of Joel Fitzgibbon. We'll have a look at what the government said today and if it makes sense we'll do it. Because we don't approach this sort of negativity of the Government where as soon as one side of politics has an idea the other side has got to get out a big stick and whack it. So we'll have a look at that. But in addition, we've already offered $100 million for drought relief. We've also said that when it comes to central Queensland, that we will invest in the Rookwood weir which is going to open up 2,000 agricultural jobs. In Tasmania as well, I was down here a little while ago and we said that we would do tranche 3 of the irrigation projects, $100 million, which will assist to open up new land and provide greater productivity for farmers. So we're up for helping. And also, just for dairy farmers who have been doing it hard, we want to set a floor price for milk, which will be great assistance for them when they're dealing with the processes.
 
JOURNALIST:  The foreign fighter laws that weren't passed by Parliament before it was prorogued, would you put them to a vote in the first week of your government in you're successful at the election?

SHORTEN: Well, Penny Wong dealt with this question comprehensively yesterday. I'm happy to go to the key points she said. If it wasn't because of a work-shy and lazy conservative government these laws may well have already been passed. But as you know, what we've got is a government in Canberra who has organised Parliament to sit for 10 days in eight months so no wonder we get didn't get to it. In terms of the actual security law what normally happens is that a parliamentary committee looks at the laws and we've got a unanimous position, both Labor and the others, so there's no reason why we couldn't do it in the first week back. But let's go back to the reason why we don't have it. The Morrison government cancelled Parliament so many times, they didn't want to sit, they're work-shy. So if Mr Morrison is looking to blame someone for a failure of national security, he should buy a mirror because that's the face he should blame.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you commit to putting both referendums in the first term, even if there isn't bipartisan agreement on them, especially the voice to Parliament, and doesn’t that raise the risk of a seriously damaging, and possibly a no vote as a result, a damaging campaign, that is overwhelmed by politics?
 
SHORTEN: Well, let's go to the heart of the matter. I think it’s wrong that we don't have our First Australians in our Constitution. I guess you’d probably agree with me. Isn't it time in Australia that after 120 years that we actually said that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders should be in our Constitution? So I think it's not so much the difficulty of the debate but why don't we put just some of our Australians and give them the same recognition that all other Australians have. In terms of the head of state business, we’ve said we'd have a plebiscite not a full referendum in our first term. But we will advance on recognition of our First Australians. But that's not all that we're going to do. We want to close the gap. Your skin colour in this country should not be the reason why you do better or worse. So I think it's not a question of symbolic recognition or practical work, it’s about doing all of it. We'll work with people and this goes to the broader issues in these elections. The Morrison government, by its desperate deals with extreme right wing parties, is promising us if they get elected, a return to the chaos, a return to the cuts of the last six years. I mean, what we see is it won't just be Constitutional recognition of our First Australians which becomes endangered. It will be the whole business of government. Imagine what we won't get done in this country under a Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government. This is a government who is, you know, there's an old saying and I think that Mr Morrison is going to learn the truth of this in this election campaign, that if you lie down with dogs, you’re going to get up with fleas.
 
JOURNALIST: You’ve said that there have been no formal negotiations on preferences between Labor and Mr Palmer. But do you concede that Labor did approach him about a preference deal, as he has again confirmed this morning?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, whether or not there were conversations, I would not sign off on any deal with Mr Palmer until he resolves the issue of the tens of millions of dollars that he owes taxpayers and workers. Now I’m not going to be like Mr Morrison who sort of very coyly pretends he doesn't know what’s going on in the administrative wing of his party. A deal like that, the leader’s got to be aware of. And I think that Mr Morrison’s got to come clean on what he’s promised Mr Palmer. Are we really to believe that when you do a deal with Mr Palmer he just gives you something for free? That is not that gentleman's track record. That is not that gentleman’s track record. So if there have been conversations to find out what Mr Palmer is up to, well that is as it is. But no deals from Labor. Because, and I think it's a legitimate question which you should be asking Mr Morrison, what arrangements has he made to get from Mr Palmer the hundreds of millions of dollars that he owes the Commonwealth and owes the debtors? How is it that this bloke, this Mr Morrison who’s always up on the high ground, always on his soap box, you know, parading his morality, yet you know, when it comes to doing a deal with Mr Palmer, he puts all of that aside, gets to the bottom of the barrel. What is Mr Morrison doing as the prime minister, doing a deal with Mr Palmer, when Mr Palmer owes his workers and owes taxpayers tens of millions of dollars? I’d like to get Anthony’s take on this, because he has done negotiations, not on the preferences, but with some of these crazy crossbenchers who the government keeps trying to desperately prop up.
 
ALBANESE: Look, Scott Morrison had a choice between standing up for ripped off workers or sucking up to a tosser who ripped them off and he chose the tosser. He chose Clive Palmer. The fact is that today when I heard that Scott Morrison was holding a press conference with the deputy prime minister, I thought that's interesting, Scott Morrison and Clive Palmer are having a joint press conference. I wonder why they’re doing it in Parkes. Because the fact is that this bloke, this bloke, should be an anathema to people who are mainstream Australians. I did have to negotiate through the 43rd Parliament. But it was pretty hard some of the time, because Clive was asleep, sitting on the frontbench during question time. Here we have, here in Tasmania, can I say this: this morning we have comments from the National Party senator, and you'll remember him, he’s the guy who was actually appointed as an independent to replace the Jacqui Lambie Party senator, Jacqui Lambie, when she had to resign, when she was the member of that party, before she was an independent, before she was a member of Palmer United Party which is how she was elected. That person, who has never been elected by anybody, has been through about five different parties. I mean this is the recipe for absolute chaos in this country that Scott Morrison is putting forward. But today, this bloke has said there's no difference between the Nationals and One Nation, which is why they’ll give preferences to One Nation. Just like Scott Morrison’s party, the LNP, are doing preference deals with One Nation throughout Queensland. Now, here in Tasmania that's particularly offensive. Because we have Pauline Hanson who joined in on the conspiracy theory about Port Arthur. About Port Arthur. And you have a Tasmanian senator saying there's no difference between One Nation and the Nationals. Well what’s very clear about these preference negotiations that have taken place, whether it's Palmer or whether it's Hanson, is that it is a recipe for absolute chaos. And if we have a Morrison-Hanson-Palmer government, then it will be the most chaotic in Australia's history. And Australians need to think very carefully, not just about not voting for these fringe hard right parties but about not voting for someone who is prepared to promote them and bring them in as if they are mainstream. They are not. They are dangerous, they are wreckers, and they would be at the heart of a Morrison government if he's successful in three weeks' time.
 
JOURNALIST: Can you clarify your comments on Sky, did you say there were no conversations with Labor...
 
ALBANESE: I haven’t done Sky. That was the Today Show. I have to be loyal to the Today show. They give me a slot every Friday at 7:15.
 
JOURNALIST: Can you clarify, did you say there were no conversations with Labor powerbrokers at all?
 
ALBANESE: About preferences. About preferences, seriously. A confession here, from time to time, I have been referred to by some of you people as a Labor Party powerbroker. From time to time. I know how to negotiate. And we're not negotiating preferences with these parties.
 
JOURNALIST: What about legislation? You say they shouldn't be brought into the mainstream. That means that Labor won't deal with them in the next Parliament?
 
ALBANESE: Look what it means is we don't want them in the next Parliament. That’s what it means. What it means is we are working each and every day to stop them getting into Parliament. Scott Morrison is working each and every day to get them into Parliament. By putting…
 
JOURNALIST: Could you answer the question?
 
ALBANESE: I'm answering it absolutely - you might not like the answer, but it's the one that is required. Which is that, which is that they won't get into Parliament unless they get the excess from the LNP vote in Queensland. That's how Palmer gets into Parliament. Scott Morrison can stop that. He can stop that today by not giving them preferences and putting a bloke who has ripped off workers, has ripped off taxpayers, who has ads speaking about foreign investment in Australia that are funded, because of foreign investment in Australia and the royalties he receives. A bloke who speaks about foreign investment, whose corflutes are printed in China. That’s what this bloke stands for. Scott Morrison needs to explain that, because we will stand up for the national interest.
 
JOURNALIST: If you feel that strongly about him why won't Labor rule out any dealing with Clive Palmer's party should you win the election?

SHORTEN: First of all the election is not over. And what we're warning Australians is you have now seen, Mr Morrison has shown his hand. A vote for Scott Morrison is a vote for Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. What we now see is the prospect, if they are successful, of the most extreme right-wing government in Australia's history. We see the prospect of the most chaotic, risky government in Australia's history. Does anyone really believe that when you sit down with One Nation or you sit down with Palmer, that they're just giving preferences, One Nation and Palmer, to the Liberal Party and the LNP out of the goodness of their heart? That somehow it's an act of charity? Of course it's not. And the question you have got to ask the government, is what promises have been made. Do we have to water down our gun laws? Do we have to forgive Clive Palmer's debt which he owes the taxpayers and the workers? What is the deal. I mean old Morrison here, he's a very sneaky operator. I mean you could ask Malcolm Turnbull that. But he is a sneaky operator. In Melbourne and in Sydney and in Hobart and Launceston he says Oh no, we don't like One Nation, we'll put them below Labor. But up in Queensland where it really matters, he's given a sly nudge and a wink to his mate the Deputy Prime Minister, the Nationals, and to his party in Queensland you can do whatever deal you want. Well that's not on. The real issue here is do Australians want the prospect of the next three years of cuts, chaos, desperate behaviour by the Morrison-Palmer-Hanson government.

JOURNALIST: Your proposal for a debate at the National Press Club, will that be in prime time and if not, why not?

SHORTEN: First of all, yesterday Channel Two said what about us, and Channel Nine said what about us, and you complained about Channel Seven had an interview and Sky. So I thought the neatest and cleanest solution was to have you all in the same room at the National Press Club. We're happy to do it at lunch time. The good news is they have invented i-view. They can play it in the evening if you want to. We are happy to debate. But the other point is if we are going to talk about debates how have you gone finding Melissa Price? There should be a search party sent out to check on her whereabouts. Because we haven't had a debate on the environment or climate change between their ministers. And have they got the Minister for Industrial Relations out of witness protection? Where's the wages policy debate? And apparently Dan Tehan won't do one debate with Tanya Plibersek.

JOURNALIST: A local question. Is Labor disappointed that Macquarie Point is still sitting idle? [Inaudible] unlike here it has not been activated at all.

ALBANESE: Frankly this is an indictment on the state Liberal government. This is appalling. We put in 2012 $50 million as a catalyst to get Macquarie Point going. We built the [inaudible]. We fixed a whole range of the issues getting them off the site. What that should be is an area that drives the economy here. And the vision that was there for a mix of commercial, residential, hospitality and tourism with the waterfront, is absolutely tragic that we're at 2019 and they haven't got their act together to actually advance that project. Our $50 million was a very serious investment indeed. And if you look at the difference, I've got to say, between what a private sector operator in David Walsh and his crew have done at this site. Have a look at this use of this magnificent natural environment to open it up to people and take advantage of it and then go down and look at the mess that is Macquarie Point. And if we are successful and Bill appoints me hopefully as the infrastructure minister ...
 
SHORTEN: [inaudible]
 
ALBANESE: You just got that commitment. (LAUGHTER) Very good! One of the things that I'll be doing is sitting down with Premier Hodgman and saying listen mate, let's get on with it. Let's actually start delivering jobs. Just like what today's announcement is about. Macquarie Point is about jobs. Jobs in construction, but in the long term, jobs in hospitality, as well as just uniting the city and the water. One of the things about being cities minister, and this wasn't even included in their so-called city deal, cities for too long had industry on the waterfront because waterways were seen essentially as places where you put out the rubbish. Now with Tony Burke doing his urban waterways program, with our city partnerships program, in general what we want to do is to maximise the wonderful natural environment that Australia's waterways bring to our cities, to our urban environments, and Macquarie Point is a great example of something that we would advance.
 
JOURNALIST: Tasmanian Liberals have come out today and said this funding as well as a commitment to push for a Tasmanian AFL team, that these funding commitments are out of touch with the community. What would your response be to that?
 
SHORTEN: Why is it that Liberals whenever they see a new idea, a good idea, find an excuse not to do it? Let's talk about it. When the Liberals say that Tasmania shouldn't get some AFL funding, they need to explain why they are running around on mainland Australia providing AFL funding for the Swans, providing AFL funding for Collingwood. This is a government, a Liberal government nationally who wants to treat Tassie as second class. But let's go to some of the issues which we think are in touch. Jobs are an in touch issue. This will generate jobs. But what I also think is an in touch issue where the Liberals are nowhere within any close range of us is health funding. Did you know that we have already announced $100 million-plus of specific health projects for Tasmania. Because we don't think that Tasmanians because they live in Tasmania should have longer waiting lists than the mainland. Because we think that in Tasmania if you've got a diagnosis of cancer, you should be able to access metastatic cancer nurses just like they can elsewhere. Prostate nurses just like they can elsewhere. And when you look at what we are doing on health, that's just specific projects. Did you know because of our $2.8 billion hospital fund, we're going to see greater investment and reverse the cuts to Tasmanian hospitals that have occurred? Did you know because of our $2.3 billion plan to turbocharge Medicare, to help practically remove a lot of the out of pocket costs for cancer treatment, that is going to be of massive benefit to Tasmanians. And of course, let's not forget Labor's commitment to restore and start increasing the patient rebate when you go and see the GP. When you look at it, when it comes from tourism and jobs, when it comes to providing Tasmania some equal status in grassroots footy as they do on the mainland, or indeed to a fundamental issue like health, Labor has got all points over the Liberals. Maybe what the Tasmanian Liberals should do is rather than being a cheer squad for cuts and chaos to Tasmania from Canberra, maybe they should take a leaf out of Bec White's book and start fighting for Tasmania. Thank you, catch you soon.

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, BILL SHORTEN: Good afternoon everybody. Today Labor has launched its policy for Australian women. I am very proud of the policy and I am proud of the fact that Labor has so many talented women presenting themselves for election and contributing to this and all of our policies. Labor has outlined a vision to help close the gender pay gap between men and women in Australia. And very importantly, we're urgently committed to contributing $660 million to tackle the scourge of family violence. I'd now like to introduce Tanya Plibersek, and I congratulate her and Penny and the whole team. You know, it's exciting. If Labor wins this election on May 18th, for the first time in the nation's history a government will be made up of half women parliamentarians. Over to Tanya.

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well, thanks very much, Bill. It is very exciting to be here with you and with Penny and, of course, with Linda Burney to launch Labor's women's policy. This is the most comprehensive women's policy that an opposition has ever taken to an election. And it's got so many strong policies in it because of the work of shadow ministers like Linda, because of our Status of Women Committee, because of the hard work of Labor Party members all over Australia. This policy document includes a very comprehensive plan, as Bill mentioned, to tackle family violence - including extra funding for emergency accommodation; extra funding for programs to keep women and their children safely in the family home; extra funding to build 250,000 new affordable rental properties through our National Rental Affordability Scheme; extra funding for stronger legal services to assist victims and their children; stronger funding for measures to teach respectful relationships to our children in schools. It's a very comprehensive plan here to reduce and, one day, eliminate family violence and sexual violence in Australia. But of course, the plan goes into details in other areas as well. Economic security and independence are absolutely critical to women having real choice and control in their lives. Making sure that women are paid equally to men, particularly low-paid workers in industries like childcare. Making sure that their wages actually reflect the complexity and the seriousness of the work they do. Making sure that women are better paid in their retirement by reducing the superannuation pay gap. Of course, we have policies throughout this plan for women's health as well. We've got a very strong focus on sexual and reproductive health in this women's plan too. So I'm very proud of what we've included in the plan. It is very comprehensive. There will be a few extra policies that we announce in coming weeks as well - particularly in the area of low-paid workers' wages - that will very much assist women workers. I think when you look at this plan you see the great policy work that's been done. And one of the reasons that we've been able to do it is because we have incredibly strong representation of women in our Parliamentary Labor Party and in the Labor Party generally. You can't really help but draw a contrast between Labor, on track to meet our 50-50 target six years ahead of schedule, and Scott Morrison who, when a quarter of the female members in his parliamentary team told him that there's a culture problem, that there's a bullying problem within the Parliamentary Liberal Party, said ‘nothing to see here’ and refused to address it. The Liberals are actually on track to have fewer women in the House of Representatives than there will be men named Andrew in the House of Representatives after the next election. Michael McCormack, when asked whether the Nationals had a women problem, said, no - both our women are ministers. Both. Only two. So the reason Labor's able to do so well in these policies is, of course, Bill's leadership and commitment to the issue. But also the fact that the modern Labor Party actually represents modern Australia because of our gender make-up. We're able to pay for these policies because we've made tough decisions when it comes to many of the savings that we've found, and we've prioritised investing in better services for victims of domestic violence, for closing the gender pay gap, closing the superannuation pay gap, making sure that low-paid workers are better paid. We've prioritised that over tax cuts for the top end of town. What you know for certain is that, when you're contrasting Labor and the Liberal Party, the Liberal Party is looking backwards. They're stuck in the past. They've got people like the candidate for Macnamara, who refuses to apologise for saying that women who are childless wouldn't make good members of Parliament because they lack the necessary empathy. You've got a Prime Minister that refuses to admit that there's a bullying or a culture problem within the Liberal Party when it comes to women and refuses to pull into line a candidate like this with such old-fashioned views. Whether it's women's policy, whether it's climate change, whether it's marriage equality, the Liberals are stuck in the past.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Tanya. Are there any questions on today's policy launch or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, while we're on the topic of expressing views about women, one of your NT Senate candidates has posted a few comments on social media that have been framed as vulgar around Natasha Griggs and Emma Alberici. Will you disendorse him from the Labor team?

SHORTEN: Listen, I only found out about this overnight. I think he has been incredibly stupid. He's not running in a winnable spot, but we've told him, I understand the party has told him to take it down and apologise straightaway.
 
JOURNALIST: You have been offered debates by the ABC and Channel Nine - both of those debates being played on the main channels on those free-to-air stations - instead, you're on 7TWO and Sky News with fewer people watching. Why have you not accepted the ABC and Nine...?

SHORTEN: Let me be the healer! First of all, on the debates, we do have two scheduled. I'm really pleased that I'm going to Western Australia to do the debate. They haven't had a big debate like this before. It's been a little bit of a negotiation to get it right, but I think we're there. We've got another debate scheduled with Sky in Brisbane. We've got two debates. Let's see how they go. I'm open to doing more. But I also would just note that this sudden belated interest in the Liberal Party in debating us - these people have invented the part-time Parliament. I'm not even talking about the Member for Manila. We had seven sitting days in eight months. If Mr Morrison wants to spend a lot of time listening to me, he can always vote for me. Actually, on debates, there is another point, now you come to mention it. Why on earth is this government hiding all of its ministers? I'm up for debates with Mr Morrison. We've got two scheduled already. But gee whiz, they're hard to find, some of these government ministers, aren't they? We should almost set a little prize - you know, where on earth is Melissa Price? Environment, climate change, we can't get a debate there. Industrial relations, wages policy, the issue that dare not speak its name in Coalition ranks? How about a debate on workplace relations? And how about that hoary old chestnut for the Government, a National Integrity Commission? Surprise, surprise - does this government want its Attorney-General to debate our Shadow Attorney-General? No way. I mean, with all of the scandals engulfing this government, from Paladin to Manus to Helloworld to goodness knows what's gone on with Eastern Agriculture. No wonder Mr Morrison is keeping many of his ministers in witness protection because he's too embarrassed by them or too afraid of what they'll say.
 
JOURNALIST: If you are so confident in your agenda, why have you rejected these debates in front of these mass national audiences?
 
SHORTEN: We haven't rejected them. But, first of all, we've got two scheduled. And secondly, let's get a few of those shadow ministers out and a few of the government ministers out, and we're certainly open to doing it. The other thing is - let's see how the government goes answering questions in these two debates. If they're good affairs, then we're happy to do more of them.
 
JOURNALIST: You took part in four at the last election. Will you commit..?
 
SHORTEN: Three. I was there.
 
JOURNALIST: People's forum style debates.
 
SHORTEN: There was a Facebook one which I'll - of course, who was I debating then? Malcolm Turnbull.

JOURNALIST: You took part in more than two at the last election, will you not commit to doing more than that this time round? If not, what has changed? Is Scott Morrison a fiercer opponent?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, that was an eight-week election and we fit three in. This is a five-week election. We've committed to two. And again, let me just say - very open. It'll be a bit of an arm-wrestle between Channel Nine and the ABC for the third one. But the point about it is - where are Mr Morrison's ministers? Mr Morrison wants to say it's just about him and me. That's fine. I'll debate him. But the point about it is it’s also about the policies. The biggest issues in Australia at the moment. Wages, everything's going up except wages, but can we get the minister in charge of wages policy? Nup. And climate change? Why on earth? Where's this Melissa Price? She goes from success story to success story, doesn't she? I mean, we've just found out about a uranium mine, miraculously approved, in the teeth of a West Australian state court hearing, the day before an election. What a coincidence.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency says that the pay gap's going to persist in Australia until the late 2060s. You've talked about the lower end of the spectrum. Can you force big business to close its pay gaps in Australia?
 
SHORTEN: I'll get some of my shadows here to add to this. Yes, we can. What will guarantee the pay equity gap persisting for the next 50 years is if you vote for Scott Morrison at the next election. We've got fair-dinkum policies. We're going to announce some more on Sunday. We are about closing the gap. Whatever improvements have been made in the last six years is because no wages have risen. But the point about it is, we are going to say to big business, don't hide behind pay-secrecy contracts anymore. We want to see what you're paying the men in your organisation and the women. And if you're not paying them the same, why not? If not, why not? We're going to make a requirement of our procurement, we want to see what is actually happening for companies bidding for Commonwealth work. Why should a company who pays its men and women equally be at a financial disadvantage to a company who doesn't when they're bidding for Commonwealth work?

JOURNALIST: Those two methods aren't going to close the pay gap though on their own, are they?
 
SHORTEN: You should try them. Actually, I did say my colleagues would talk a little more.
 
PLIBERSEK: I think you answered it really well, Bill. The changes that we made to the Workplace Gender Equality Act and Agency last time have been responsible for a slight narrowing of the gender pay gap, but the real impact has been men's wages falling. We can't reduce the gender pay gap by undermining the growth in men's wages. We want to see men and women's wages growing strongly so measures like banning pay secrecy clauses so you can choose to disclose or not disclose your pay to your colleagues, your union and others, are really important. Making sure that companies are transparent and publishing their gender pay gap. Very large companies will be forced to disclose their gender pay gap and show what plans they have to reduce the gender pay gap. These measures are making a difference overseas, and we believe they'll make a significant difference here.

SHORTEN: Sorry, someone did ask me a question before about the uranium mine. I just want to say on that, this is yet again looking like another shonky deal by this government. Pretty big decision. Lot of money at stake. Made in the dead of night, the day before the election's called, miraculously, straight afterwards. It's apparently the most important decision the government had to make before it immediately called an election to go to the Australian people. There are questions for this government to answer here. Yet again, though, why on earth do we have the minister who is doing the approvals in hiding? It is a legitimate question for you to ask the Prime Minister, why is it that, on everything from climate change to the approval of this uranium mine, that the minister involved just can't be found?

JOURNALIST: On national security, the Prime Minister today has accused Labor of continually dragging its feet on national security legislation, including over foreign fighters. Are the days of bipartisan support in this area dead?

SHORTEN: Listen, this bloke should be ashamed of himself, playing political games especially in the shadow of the shocking Sri Lankan murders. He should be ashamed of himself. Is there no … he loves to be on the high ground, this Prime Minister, but he never fails to reach for the bottom of the barrel when it suits him. I'll get Penny to explain why this Prime Minister should be ashamed of himself.
 
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE, SENATOR PENNY WONG: Thanks very much. Can I just say this. Bill's right, he should be ashamed of himself. He knows we have given bipartisan support to national security legislation over and over again. And we have ensured bipartisan support under Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull, but the only Liberal Prime Minister in that series who wants to open up a political divide on national security has been Scott Morrison. I'm on that committee. And as Senate leader, I've ensured, with our party, that we have given not only bipartisan support, but prompt passage. Now the particular legislation in place was the subject of a unanimous agreement from the Intelligence Committee, and was not presented to the part-time Parliament of Mr Morrison. He should be ashamed of himself for playing politics with this.

JOURNALIST: Several commentators have said that the PM has outperformed you in the first couple of weeks. Mr Morrison himself has called you a "cranky bear" today. Can I ask you how you would rate your own performance in the first couple of weeks?

SHORTEN: I'm proud of our team and I'm proud of our policies. [JOURNALIST ASKING QUESTION]. Come on. I know you want me to speed up my answers, but four words! OK. We're putting forward proper policies. Let's tell the truth of the first two weeks. This government doesn't talk about you or the people. They've got no plan. They don't talk about climate change. They've spent one day on health and said that's all they're going to say on health, even though the out-of-pocket costs are going up. They have no plan to match our proposition to help cancer patients, for example. On TAFE today, they're offering $60 million. Let me give you a couple of simple numbers. 150,000 people less are doing apprenticeships now than six years ago. $3 billion worth of cuts in vocational education, and they offer $60 million? This is a government who just hopes the people have got a short memory. They have nothing positive to say about Australia. The reason why we're doing a women's policy launch today is because we are excited by what we can do for Australian women and the Australian people. The reason why we are so committed to investing, for example, in helping people in Medicare with the greatest expansion with the helping of their costs of cancers. We've got a vision for the future. I guarantee you all Mr Morrison can say is yell out "Liar, liar!"  That's all he can do. You guys should keep a count - every time he says it. He's been bottle-fed by a focus group to say, "If you just keep attacking Bill, then somehow they'll make you forget their disunity and chaos." What is shameful about this fellow is he's always up on the hill giving the preaching lecture, he’s always saying ‘I’m such a good fellow’, but then he reaches for the bottom of the barrel. He's trying to confuse people, saying we're taking their utes, which we're not. He's trying to say we're introducing a death tax, which we're not. He's tried to say somehow we’ve delayed security legislation when in fact we had a unanimous position. So he's wrong on that. This fellow knows that the only chance they have is to totally talk about me and not talk about their own policies, and to scare people about the future. This election, I believe in the first two weeks, has shown two diametrically different paths. One path is the low road. Just nothing good to say about anyone, every excuse in the world about everything, why he can't do something. Now we find out he's cosying up to the extremists in the Senate, cosying up to Mr Palmer, who owes the taxpayer $67 million. Whereas what we've chosen to do - sure, we've got our tough things to say on them - but we're also saying what we're going to do for the people. We've got a wages policy - they don't. We've got a climate change policy - they don't. We've got a policy to provide the equal treatment of women - they don't. We've got a vocational training policy to make sure that we've fixed up all the mess they've made - they don't. And we've got a policy, in fact, to make sure that we can help our health system with the best expansion in a generation. So, yeah, it'll be up to the judgement of the people, and that's what we're gonna focus on.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, to follow up on Dan's question, this Senate candidate, Mr Kurnoth in the Northern Territory, not only has posted an image with Ms Alberici, but he's also made a comment seemingly disparaging and derogatory of Natasha Griggs in 2015. Is it enough to say, to tell him to take down the Alberici post when he's made previous comments like this in the past? Should he be disendorsed?

SHORTEN: Let me know how you go with Morrison and what his candidate for Macnamara has said about people close to me, alright? So let's not start giving a lecture here. I've said this bloke is incredibly stupid. Has Morrison said that the candidate for Macnamara is incredibly stupid, which she is? Has Morrison actually set a standard for his own candidates that he's setting for ours? I understand this bloke shouldn't have said it. He's No. 4 on the Senate ticket, not running in a marginal seat like Macnamara, but that doesn't excuse it. Stupid conduct is stupid conduct. And by the way if you want to talk about who you're supporting and not supporting, why on earth is he putting an out-and-out crackpot like Fraser Anning in the seat of Capricornia ahead of Labor? Why on earth is he preferencing One Nation with that person in the Hunter Valley? Seriously. If you want to talk about quality control in political parties have a look at the Palmer United Party. Have a look at the One Nation Party. Have a look at the Liberal Party.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you extend the industry bargaining rights beyond low-paid workers?
 
SHORTEN: We know that the bargaining system's not working as it should. But I'm not convinced that we need to have, you know, everyone going into industry bargaining. What we think with our wages policy is very straightforward. Reverse the penalty-rate cuts. Pay equity for women. And we're going to have more to say on that very soon. We want to shut down sham contracting. We want to make sure that enterprise bargaining is fairer. And we want to have a living wage, and we want to reform labour hire.
 
JOURNALIST: Could you just clear up the situation with Clive Palmer? You said a couple of things about him in this press conference. Did Michael O'Connor or anybody else negotiate with Clive Palmer on your behalf to share preferences with Labor?
 
SHORTEN: No. You know in elections, I'm sure there's plenty of conversations go on. There have been no formal negotiations and furthermore, let's go to the heart of the matter why we think Mr Morrison's made such a dreadful error of judgment here. The reality is that in 2016 Queensland Nickel, of which Mr Palmer has a great interest, went into administration. That was the beginning of the year. What happened then is that workers were left with entitlements. We understand - I'm not even talking about all the creditors, small businesses - of about $74 million. What then happened is that, under the law of the land, where workers are out of pocket, the Commonwealth steps in with a safety-net payment, and then the Commonwealth seeks repayment from the company which has gone belly-up. Mr Morrison was the Treasurer who, in about April 2016, authorised the payment of about $67 million to the workers from the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth stands in the shoes of the workers to seek recovery from Queensland Nickel. Now, I think that it is actually beyond a joke that, on one hand, you've got a businessman running around spending $30 million - and some of it in your own organisations, advertising in your own organisations. He's found $30 million to put his own head all over Australia on those billboards. The government has done a deal with him. Only one leader in Australia's done a deal with Mr Palmer. Now, this government - what is their plan? What have they promised Palmer? Because I tell you, when you deal with Palmer, the idea that it's just a non-exchange arrangement with Clive Palmer would be the first time in human history. And then, what is the detail? What is Mr Morrison doing to recover the money that taxpayers are owed by Queensland Nickel? And it would have been a precondition for us to go to the heart of the matter. It's a deal-breaker for Labor to have a businessman and try and seek and do a deal on their preferences without sorting out the money owed to the taxpayer and to the workers.
 
JOURNALIST: A photographer at a media event today for a Fraser Anning candidate was allegedly punched by someone who was apparently a supporter of the party. What do you make of this?

SHORTEN: I don't know anything about that at all. I don't know anything about it. Violence is completely unacceptable.

JOURNALIST: Given your views on Clive Palmer, can you then therefore rule out doing any deal with his party to pass legislation through the Senate if you're elected?

SHORTEN: Well, my aim is to get as many of our people elected first. I do think that Mr Morrison as the current Prime Minister should explain how he's going to recover the money owed to the taxpayers. At the end of the day it's not about Mr Morrison, Clive Palmer or myself. It's about whether or not you think it's appropriate for a major political party to enter into a self-serving deal but at the same time see taxpayers out of pocket for $67 million. This is the chaos of the government. You know, someone asked earlier about the election of the last two weeks. One thing's clear. This government is increasingly desperate. The fact that they won't stop the Nationals, their Coalition partners, their bosom buddies, from doing a deal with One Nation shows their desperation. The fact that you've got Coalition Members of Parliament preferencing Fraser Anning very high up the ticket after all of what he has said. The fact that you've got a prime minister of Australia up on the high moral ground always saying how good they are but reaching to the bottom of the barrel with a Palmer deal. Never forget what happened last time Palmer got elected. Never forget. And, you know, four senators, three political parties - the chaos of those years. Listen, I might finish up - Penny Wong's had to serve in the Senate and seen what happens when the Liberals and Nationals cosy up to the extreme right and the desperate and dateless of the far right, and I think that we should hear from Penny about what happened.

WONG: Just very briefly. I think we all know that Clive got a lot of people elected to the Senate. He had three people elected to the Senate plus himself to the House, and then just two short years later we had three different political parties that we had to deal with in the Senate. Bill just said Clive is desperate and dateless. What I'd say is this, in addition to that. This is a marriage of convenience. A marriage of convenience between an ad man and a con man. That's what Scott Morrison is offering the Australian people. That's what Scott Morrison is offering the Australian people. I'd make this other point. What this really shows is Scott Morrison's desperation. Does anybody in this room believe you can actually govern with Clive Palmer? Do any of you believe that? Scott Morrison doesn't believe that. But he's so desperate to cling on to power, he'll do a deal with Clive Palmer even though he knows he can't govern with him. You know what that means, ladies and gentlemen? What it means is more of the same, more chaos and division. Thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Thanks, everybody.

And of course, we celebrate Anzac Day and dawn services commemorating the landings at Gallipoli all around Australia, at RSLs in big cities and small towns. And we celebrate and commemorate it on foreign fields. That is why it's deeply concerning of reports of a violent Islamist extremist who's been arrested we are told, because they were planning a terrorist act against people commemorating the landings at Gallipoli. This is deeply concerning. I'd urge Australians who have family overseas - and indeed Australians travelling overseas - to please check with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade travel advisory. It is currently advising a high level of caution for people there.

I've asked for security briefings and they'll be coming in hours or in the next day. I understand our security agencies are doing everything they can.

One thing I would say though is that this world should have no tolerance for violent extremism; violent Islamic extremism or violent extremism from any quarter. What we can't let it do is discourage the marvellous tradition of young Australians, in particular, but Australians travelling to the battlefields where Australians have fallen in previous conflicts.

We should be proud of our identity as Australians. We should be proud of our history. We should learn about the sacrifice. We've always got to maintain very high caution. The world can be a dangerous place, as we've seen so tragically most recently in Sri Lanka. But I for one love the fact that so many younger Australians in particular are coming with dawn services in numbers unseen. I was talking to Vietnam veterans. We've learned a lot from the shoddy and shameful way we treated those veterans so I think we want to encourage people to still understand our history and the sacrifice. But at every stage, we have to maintain the utmost care.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can we ask you about your thoughts on the news that one of the Sri Lankan bombers appears to have studied in Australia?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, today is not a day for politics. We don't know much more than what we've heard on the news. I think today, I'd like to confine my remarks to ANZAC Day. And of course, just encourage Australians who have family members travelling, check with the DFAT, check with your family, but we've just got to proceed with caution and care.
 
JOURNALIST: Just quickly, how do you reflect on the fact that this seems to be the new-norm, that you've got an ANZAC Day service and ANZAC Day services that are under threat from alleged extremists and Islamists?
 
SHORTEN: I think that Australians can make a choice about the world. We can make a choice that it's too scary, we should never leave home, that it is too confronting and too difficult to navigate. I don't have that view. Just because there are terrorists in the world, we can't let them win by discouraging our young people from travelling. I've got teenagers, they're not quite at the age of travelling overseas, but I imagine in the next couple of years they will. I hope they do. We're going to try and teach them to be as careful as they can. But Anzac Day, as I said, is a sacred day. We can't afford to let these extremists discourage us. On the other hand, we've got to maintain the utmost care. And that's why I for one, am grateful that we live in a country with such capable security services, police services and Defence services.
 
Thanks everybody.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Cathy. Today, we are focused on local workers, better wages and better jobs for Queenslanders and for Australians. My message to the Australian wage earners, to millions of middle class and working class Australians is that May 18th, and the vote on May 18th, is the last chance for three years to get wages moving, to reverse the cuts to penalty rates, to do something about reforming long term permanent casuals, to make sure that we clamp down on rorts in 457 visas, to reform labour hire. My message is that on May 18th it is your last chance for three years. Because if the current mob are returned, the divided, dysfunctional anti-worker government mob we currently have in Canberra are returned, they are going to take an election victory as a green light to continue for the next three years in the same ramshackle, pro top end of town manner, which they have been doing for the last six years and that hasn’t helped Australian workers. We want to stand up for Australian workers. We want to make sure they get better pay and better quality of work. This Government just wants to cut schools and hospitals, cut penalty rates, so they can give tax cuts to the top end of town. What I would like to do is ask Jason Clare to talk about our exciting infrastructure announcements and talk about a few of the issues we have just gone through.

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE, INVESTMENT,
RESOURCES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA: Thanks very much Bill. I was here in Townsville last Wednesday with Cathy where we got to announce $12 million to build a brand new Townsville motor sport precinct. I said at the time, Cathy you'll remember, that this is a project that would help to make the roads safer here in Townsville by training local young people how to drive safely but it would also create jobs and bring more people to town. What we're announcing today, in funding for road and funding for rail, will do more of the same but on a bigger scale. It will help to make the roads safer up north but it will also create more jobs. What we're announcing is a quarter of a billion dollars in road and rail projects. One hundred and forty-four million dollars for the for the fifth and final part of the Townsville Ring Road and $100 million to invest in upgrading the rail line between Mount Isa and Townsville. That will help to ensure that we get even more out of the Mount Isa north-west mineral province and get more of what's extracted there onto rail. If you've ever driven the Barkly or the Flinders, you'll know there’s a lot of awfully big trucks on that road. Lots of people I speak to in Mount Isa and Townsville will tell me they want to see more of the product that comes out of the ground in Mount Isa onto rail. That will help to make that happen, help to make our roads safer, but also creating more jobs at the Mount Isa end, and more jobs here in Townsville, and more jobs in the construction work that's needed to build that road and build that rail. It's all part of our Townsville jobs plan.

Whether it's the expansion of the port, whether it's the water pipeline projects for water security here in Townsville, that Brad Webb, the owner of this facility designed and developed and we should pay credit to him, for the work he did, and that we'll fund if we win government. But also the investment in road, the investment in rail, creating jobs here - one in ten workers on these projects to be apprentices, and making sure as part of our local market testing that before a contractor looks for workers or subcontractors interstate or from Brisbane that they first have to test the market here and give the jobs to local subcontractors and local workers and creating more jobs for the people of Townsville who need it. Jobs, jobs, jobs. That's what this is all about. Thanks.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, your candidate for McPherson, has said during the campaign that Labor is committed to reviewing the Adani - the federal approvals for Adani. Belinda Hassan, the candidate for Dawson, has said that twice now, that Labor may review it. Why are your candidates under the impression that you're committed to a review?
 
SHORTEN: I have made it clear that we have no plans to review it. Our position is that the deals have to stack up commercially. We'll be guided by the best science. I'm going to implement the law of the land. No more, no less and of course, we're not going to engage in sovereign risk.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the worker who approached you yesterday in Gladstone, earning $250,000 –
 
SHORTEN: Good money.
 
JOURNALIST: Good money.

SHORTEN: Union - union contract, just saying.

JOURNALIST: Yeah. Well wouldn't it have been straightforward and honest of you to say to him, you're going to deny him a tax cut that the Government is offering, and increase his taxes by 2 per cent.

SHORTEN: No Mark, that isn't the conversation. What I said is that I understood his point of view. He's frustrated, he does a lot of overtime, and he wants to make sure that he's making ends meet. What I have made very clear, on many occasions, is that in 2022-2023, we will remove the Budget repair levy. So that's when the Budget will be in a proper surplus, and sustainable. So absolutely, I can say to people, that we get that everybody feels they're paying too much income tax in this country, but it's a matter of priorities. I have said, and I don't often do this, but you know they publish me correctly - but in The Australian - six months ago they reported me as saying exactly what I was saying yesterday. That in fact, we would like to lower income taxes for everybody, but you have got to do it when it's sustainable. The other point I made to that worker is that this government's tax cuts are on the never-never. Like, why is Mr Morrison ducking and weaving and not saying how much he's going to give away to the top two or three percent? I understand the number is $77 billion. But that - no one in the government is willing to own up to the fact that they want to give an $11,000 - an annual tax cut, to millionaires, and $11 a week to most people. And what this government won't do, is not only have they been caught out shovelling truck loads of money to the top end, but they won't say how they're going to pay for it. What I won't say to workers, is that I'll give you a tax cut and then cut your hospitals and your schools at the same time. Labor has got a sensible plan, well funded. The big problem in this country is that capital in this country is taxed lightly, and income is taxed heavily. You know, on your capital gains tax, you get half of that tax free. If you own the shares, and the dividends, you get a 30 per cent gift from the government. Capital is taxed lightly, but income earners, top right down to the bottom, and there's many more at the bottom in this country, they don't get a fair deal from this Government.

JOURNALIST: To be fair, what you said to him yesterday was that you would look at it. As somebody who is weeks away from the election and your shadow minister this morning told us that you were just being courteous to this worker by saying that. Is it more than being courteous, is it being misleading given we're this close to election?
 
SHORTEN: Sorry I’m just going to, we have said on the record in The Australian newspaper that we would like to do more on tax. I don't blame you if you missed it but the point is we’ve also said on the Budget repair levy, that 2 per cent, that we would like to remove it in 2022-23. I've been up front, up front six months ago, up front yesterday, up front today. But where is Mr Morrison? Why won't he be up front?) No, let's get to this. I'm not going to let him run around the country taking his happy pills and having his little photos and getting away with serious scrutiny. You know, the Prime Minister's job isn't to be the court jester, it’s to be the man with the plan with the answers. I’ve got the plan and I’ve got the answers.
 
JOURNALIST: On water buybacks, Labor's position is for a Commission of Inquiry?
 
SHORTEN: Yep.
 
JOURNALIST: Why not a Royal Commission? Is it an acknowledgement that there have been too many Royal Commissions, there's some creep going on in that space?
 
SHORTEN: This is an acknowledgement that there's something very suspicious about the water buybacks conducted under this government. This is an acknowledgement that there are questions to answer. We have taken a methodical approach to this unfolding scandal. We contacted the Department of Agriculture, we asked them to provide us with documents, a series of documents. Guess what? Time came for the documents to be provided, time went, no documents. We think a Commission of Inquiry has the powers of a Royal Commission. It's set up under the Royal Commission Act 1902. But we don't think this should be an inordinately long inquiry or an inordinately expensive inquiry but the people are owed the truth. This is one of the many reasons why I'm also backing a national Anti-Corruption Commission because under this government there is too much dodgy behaviour when it comes to money and the Government and the Ministers. For example, you have the Paladin contract. We all know that's been desperately swept under the carpet. We know that you’ve got the ongoing saga which is Hello World. And now you’ve got Eastern Agricultural Services. There is a pattern of events with this government which goes to a very fundamental question about their honesty in administering money and a Commission of Inquiry is exactly the right way to go.
 
JOURNALIST: At a recent WeChat Q&A, you avoided answering questions about Huawei, Chinese interference and negative views of the Chinese Communist Party in Australia. Was that a case of self-censoring to meet the WeChat and Communist Party rules?

SHORTEN: No, not at all. First of all, the questions which came in came in on a range of matters and I answered the questions that were put to me by the interpreters in the room. But let me make my view clear. On Huawei, and I have said it plenty of times, I'll take the national security advice. When it comes to taking foreign donations, we led and the Government followed. So our view’s very clear. What I’ve also said though about our relations with China is they shouldn't be viewed through the strategic prism of disaster. In other words, you've got to reach out and deal with the Chinese Government not just in the sort of worst case scenario strategic threat, but as economic opportunity and as a country we've had so many exchanges between people to people, business to business. Sorry, hang on. Sorry Dan I’m going to share the questions. Do you know I haven't given a single question yet to a woman journalist? And I'm going to do that.
 
JOURNALIST: You’ve said that there'll be no review of the Adani project. Could you be precise? What are you talking about? There’ll be no review of the recent groundwater decision, there’ll be no review of the project, there’ll be no review of any environmental approval that's already been undertaken, what do you mean by that?
 
SHORTEN: The question which I answered, the question which I was asked was do you have any plans to review Adani. I say I have no plans to review Adani, full stop.
 
JOURNALIST: But do you have a plan to review the recent groundwater management decision which Tony Burke and many of your spokespeople have indicated that, have built the case basically for a review by saying that Melissa Price was bullied into that decision. Do you mean you will not review that decision?
 
SHORTEN: Melissa Price, there’s a name you don't often hear in federal politics. She’s the Environment Minister. Let's get her out of witness protection to explain was she was bullied or not, but I go back to your other question, we have no plans to review the Adani approvals.
 
JOURNALIST: You’ve got one candidate saying that there will be a review of Adani, another saying hand on heart there won't be, and you say there are no plans to. Do you concede that your messaging on this issue is inconsistent?
 
SHORTEN: No I concede my messaging on it is entirely consistent. If we want to talk about candidates, have you guys met this number three LNP candidate in Queensland, the guy who thinks that three year old child care is a Labor conspiracy? Or have you met their candidate in Melbourne Ports who just clearly says, much prefers private schools to government schools? If you want to look at erratic candidates, why on earth is Mr Morrison not accounting - does he agree with candidate X or candidate Y? In terms of my own candidate, I have good candidates, they're working very hard, I couldn't be happier.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of the ad by GetUp that showed Tony Abbott as a lifeguard allowing people to drown and what do you think of GetUp itself as an organisation you helped set up?
 
SHORTEN: I think it's a really stupid ad. I think it’s grossly disrespectful to 150,000 surf lifesavers. In terms of GetUp they're independent from us. Some of the stuff they say I haven't agreed with, some of the stuff in the past I have. But this ad – well out of line. You can have your disagreements with Tony Abbott but I respect the fact that he's a surf lifesaver.

JOURNALIST: You say your position is consistent but Labor's message as a party isn't consistent, don't voters deserve to know what you actually... (inaudible)
SHORTEN: My backbenchers have got plenty of views, that's life. We don't run a dictatorship. Cathy O'Toole is a north Queenslander first and foremost, she's got a very clear position. But at the end of the day, the Labor Cabinet will make the decisions and we have no plans to review Adani.

JOURNALIST: Why were they under that impression Mr Shorten surely that would indicate that they are getting that messaging from campaign headquarters or out of your office if they're saying Labor is committed to reviewing these latest approvals by Melissa Price.

JOURNALIST: Greg that dog's not going to hunt mate. Let me just answer the question. That dog's not going to hunt. A scare campaign. I’ll be saying that we are not going to review Adani, full stop. We have no plans.

JOURNALIST: You're saying your position is consistent but on the consistency of your position in the past year you've said you're against Adani.

SHORTEN: No I haven't.

JOURNALIST: Well I can give you the quote if you like?

SHORTEN: Go ahead.

JOURNALIST: You said that you were … sceptical …
 
SHORTEN: I’ve said I was sceptical of it and I was ...
 
JOURNALIST: … of the commercial pace for Adani …
 
SHORTEN: I’ve said that I was sceptical of it …
 
JOURNALIST: … and you said that you don't like it, so do you remain sceptical of the commercial pace? Do you like it now? What is your position just for consistency’s sake?

SHORTEN: I have said that I was sceptical of it because they missed so many deadlines. Now they have filled some of those deadlines. When I said I was sceptical of it, that’s because they've had more false starts than a horse race. Hang on, the reality is they seem to have found their commercial finance so that’s that. But in terms of the science, the law, sovereign risk - we will be governed by the law. That has been our position.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten you made a virtue throughout this campaign of saying let's be honest, let's be upfront with people. When the man asked you yesterday for a tax cut, why weren't you honest with him and simply said we are going to tax you more?

SHORTEN: Because we are actually going to reduce...

JOURNALIST: But you're not, you're going to tax him two per cent more, debt levy.
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, just go back to that. I was very clear that I understand why people who are income earners in this country think they are paying too much tax. We have got a plan to take the Budget repair surplus of the Budget repair levy off when the Budget gets to 1 per cent surplus under a Labor Government, which is 2022- 2023. But I also concluded my conversation by saying that the current fellow is promising you a tax cut but he is not explaining how he pays for it. You and I both know, in fact we all here know, Mr Morrison hasn't owned up that he is going to give $77 billion to the top 2 or 3 per cent and he hasn't said how he is going to pay for it. The Australia Institute belled the cat when it said that it would be up to $40 billion worth of cuts. The only way this fellow can sustain any promises is he has to get re-elected twice and then he has to do so by cutting services like schools and hospitals. That is not the way we will do tax reform. What we will do on tax reform is look after the vast bulk of people and as you all know, for those of you who heard what I said in 2018 in our Budget reply, we had bigger, better, fairer tax cuts. Now the Government has caught up and so we have matched them there. But when it comes to tax reform we will do it but we will not do it on the basis of cutting schools and hospitals.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten when you were in Darwin you were asked a story around that, Labor ruling out tax cuts and tax relief for people earning over $90,000 in preference of that going to essential services like schools and hospitals. This gentleman was asking about people on $250,000, so very much up there in terms of income earning. If this man goes into the election on May 18 voting for Labor because you've told him you will look at tax cuts for people like him, like his colleagues on similar earnings, has he been misled and is he voting for a different Labor Party than he thinks he is?

SHORTEN: No we've actually said previously, and you can go to The Australian newspaper six months ago, we said quite a bit that we will take off the Budget repair levy in 22-23. Beyond that, we said that when we can afford to lower income taxes in this country we will. But what we won't do is rob Peter to pay Paul. What we won't do is deny three and four-year-olds universal kindergarten because of unfunded tax cuts to the top end.

JOURNALIST: How did you not you say this to the gentleman yesterday?

SHORTEN: We had a brief interchange.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe that nationalising coal fired power stations and energy generators generally is a good idea?

SHORTEN: I have seen the latest government comment. This is a Coalition in complete climate chaos. They are completely divided. The only chance of real action on climate change, the only chance of lower energy prices sustainably in the long run is voting Labor on May 18.

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten, inflation has come out today at zero per cent, below expectations. What does that mean for the economy?
 
SHORTEN: That just shows you this is an economy with - zero per cent is a problem. It's actually below what the Reserve Bank forecasts is good. If there's no inflation in this quarter, that tells you this is an economy running on empty. It shows you that people have stopped spending money and do you know why they have stopped spending money? Because wages aren't moving. That is not a healthy number. What that means is that we are going down and down and down. Do not be fooled. When an economy is shrinking or when it has that sort of number, that's not what the Reserve Bank thinks is good monetary outcomes or good monetary policy for the nation. What it tells me is this nation's growth is very fragile. What it shows me is that this Government's budget is already in disarray. What it shows me is that people are closing their wallets and purses because they are spending household savings just to make ends meet.
 
JOURNALIST: Just on WeChat, why is your account registered to an unidentified man in Shandong province and are you comfortable with subjecting yourself to the political censorship that goes with that platform?

SHORTEN: I'm not fussed at all. I do not feel censored by the Chinese Government. I left the setting up of my WeChat account to the Labor Party. So you'll have to ask them how they set it up. But I don't feel censored. I don't feel censored by either the Government, the Greens, One Nation or indeed the Chinese Government.
 
JOURNALIST: What do you make of Turkish locals being banned from attending those Gallipoli services?
 
SHORTEN: I didn't know about that. But I'll be guided by the Australian Government on this matter. I'll be guided by whatever the security views are. Be guided by whatever the Turkish Government says here.
 
JOURNALIST: What is your gut reaction to it though, banning locals from attending the local service?

SHORTEN: I don't know what all the circumstances. So my gut reaction is don't comment until you know what is happening.
 
JOURNALIST: Just on your climate change policy how is it congruent to open up the Betaloo Basin and Labor’s 45 per cent emissions reduction target?
 
SHORTEN: Because gas is going to be a transition baseload energy source of the future. What we also need to do as we move towards 45 per cent is we’ve still got to make sure we got an Australian manufacturing sector. Therefore, opening up the gas reserves will ensure cheap domestic gas for Australia, so we can keep tens of thousands of people in their jobs in the south-east and indeed in Darwin and Brisbane. I did say last question, guys. But I'll see you at the next gig. Thank you very much.

ZAC BEERS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FLYNN: Thanks everyone for coming along, it’s great to be here in Gladstone today and I am joined by Labor's fantastic team. We've got Bill Shorten, Labor’s Opposition Leader and potentially the next Prime Minister of Australia; Brendan O'Connor, Shayne Neumann and Jason Clare all here today as well to talk about some really important announcements for Australia and in particular this region. Today we are going to be talking about Labor’s commitment to the future of manufacturing in this country. The future of the energy debate when it comes to gas and making sure we get the investment right for infrastructure because we know how important it is for the east coast of Australia and for manufacturing to make sure we have good cheap supply of gas and today's announcement is about Labor putting money on the table and making a commitment to make that happen. We are also going to be talking about Labor’s commitment when it comes to cracking down on 457s and making sure that overseas labour isn't used to undercut local workers and isn't used to undercut local jobs. Labor's got a plan for the future here in Central Queensland and right across the country. We have announced the Advanced Manufacturing Fund, $1 billion to make sure we look after manufacturing into the future, $1.1 billion for the National Hydrogen Plan which includes a research centre right here in Gladstone to make sure Gladstone is ground zero for hydrogen, the energy of tomorrow. And today's announcement coupled with that, part of our plan for the future here in central Queensland to make sure we have the jobs of tomorrow, workers have got good secure employment. Only Labor will deliver these things. And I’ll hand to Bill Shorten to talk more about today's announcements.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks. That was Zac Beers, Labor's candidate here in Flynn, very energetic.
 
Good to be here at Gladstone Port and the message we have for the people of Gladstone is that the Liberals cut wages, they cut penalty rates and they send jobs overseas. By contrast, Labor will protect penalty rates, stand up for workers and make sure that locals get the opportunity to get the jobs.
 
My colleagues are here today and they’ll take detailed questions on what we're announcing but the short summary of our propositions today is first of all, we need to reform the temporary work visa system of guest workers coming in from overseas. I'm not sure if most Australians realise but there’s 1.6 million people currently in Australia with visas which give them work rights. Surely some of those jobs could go to Australians. Now we are always going to have skilled migration, we are always going to have temporary workers in this country.
 
But we should be a country who doesn't have a temporary worker filling a skills shortage one day longer than it takes to train an Australian. This is at the heart of our story. 457 visas, when they were started, were a good idea for Australian business.
 
Now 457s means that locals are missing out on jobs. So what we want to do is put some more transparency, we want to make sure short-term skilled migration doesn't just become an excuse for cheap labour, exploitation of guest workers and locals missing out.
 
That is why we're outlining today our fantastic package to provide training and apprenticeships in Queensland, and not just Queensland but right across Australia. We've got a $1 billion package to make sure that Australians get the chance to be trained for the jobs for the future.
 
But our proposal to look after workers in Queensland and look after jobs right around Australia doesn't just stop at reforming the temporary work visa problems. What we also want to do is get more investment flowing in northern Australia. The Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund has been an abject failure. It is incredible that not one cent of a $5 billion Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund, promised by the Liberals six years ago, not one cent has been spent in Queensland.

Perhaps even more significantly the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund has probably spent more money on salaries for people who work for the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund than it has on building infrastructure in northern Australia. This has simply got to stop.
 
So Labor today is proposing new changes to the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund, especially to unlock the opportunities of tourism with $1 billion of the $5 billion going to tourism infrastructure and another $1.5 billion to support the biggest single investment in new pipelines in Australia so we can get gas flowing from where it is under the ground in Australia to help keep the manufacturing jobs of South-East Australia and Darwin and Queensland going. A lot of Australians pull me up in the street and say it is incredible that for a country that has so much gas in the ground, why Australia pays such high gas prices and that’s undermining Australian jobs. I would like to hand over to Jason Clare to very briefly talk about our Northern Australia announcement and then we will be into questions.
 
JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE, INVESTMENT, RESOURCES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA: Thanks very much Bill. It is great to be here with Zac who would be a fantastic Member of Parliament and Member for Flynn if he's fortunate enough to win this seat at the next election. As Bill said, the NAIF has been a massive failure. It really should have been called the No Actual Infrastructure Fund because it hasn't built any infrastructure in four years.
 
This was first announced four years ago next month. The government, the LNP announced an infrastructure fund four years ago and they still haven't spent a cent on infrastructure from it in the last four years here in Queensland. They have only actually spent about $15 million on infrastructure across the north and you're right, Bill, they’ve spent more on salaries for the staff and for the Board than they have spent on infrastructure. So no wonder the people of North Queensland and the people of Northern Australia are disappointed with it. Lots of big promises when it was first announced they described it as the Snowy Mountains Scheme for the north that was going to build this infrastructure and create jobs and it just hasn't.
 
We need to get it working. We need to make sure it is building the infrastructure that the north needs, that will create jobs. And a big part of that is gas pipeline infrastructure and what we're saying today is that we will allocate up to $1.5 billion to build gas pipeline infrastructure from the Betaloo Basin in the NT up to Darwin as well as from the Betaloo to the east coast. And gas pipeline infrastructure from the Galilee Basin to connect in with the Queensland gas pipeline network that goes into here at Gladstone and gas pipeline infrastructure from the Bowen Basin into the same pipeline network that feeds the facilities here. And gas, not just for exports, gas for domestic manufacturers.
 
Gas for companies here on the east coast but also gas that is going to create more jobs up in Darwin. The potential to create a big manufacturing powerhouse in Darwin off the back of that gas and potentially other fuels coming out of the Betaloo Basin. This is a big project, it's a series of projects, potentially 2,000km to 3,000km of pipeline, $5 billion worth of infrastructure, of pipelines all up that will create thousands and thousands of jobs. Jobs in constructing the pipeline and laying it out, but also jobs once it is finished. As I said jobs in Darwin but also jobs here in Gladstone, like at the Orica facility that relies on affordable gas and for all the manufacturers up and down the eastern seaboard. And to be honest this is the sort of thing that this lazy incompetent government should have done years ago. They have known about it, they’ve done nothing to make this happen. They've just let the NAIF sit there idly. It has been a massive wasted opportunity. As a result, we haven't had infrastructure built creating jobs here in north Queensland and right across the north.
 
JOURNALIST:  Mr Shorten, yesterday, repeatedly, you refused to rule out reviewing the environmental approvals - the federal environmental approvals for Adani. Can you be fair dinkum with us and with voters and tell us do you rule out reviewing those approvals?
 
SHORTEN: I have no plans to review the approvals. But if we want to be fair dinkum, let's be fair dinkum and let's tell the voters the truth here, all of us. First of all if I'm Prime Minister I will adhere to the law of the land. I'm not going to be intimidated or bullied by environmental activists or big mining companies. For me it is all about the best science, the law of the land and not creating sovereign risk.
 
JOURNALIST: So well on that, Mr. Shorten, in the past you have said you don't support Adani, you said you're sceptical of it, and the CFMEU has issued this pledge which several of your candidates, including Mr. Beers have either signed or said they're going to sign. It's calling on you not to do anything to stand in the way of this project. So will do you anything to stand in the way of the project?
 
SHORTEN: It doesn't matter if it's a union who comes to me or a business, an environmental activist. What I'll do if Prime Minister, is I'll work with all of those interests, but I'm not going to be the servant of any of those interests. We will adhere to the science, we will adhere to the law, we won't create sovereign risk.
 
But what we're also doing today, is we are refusing to let the debate about sustainable quality jobs in Australia be dumbed down to one project. For the record, Queensland currently exports 220 million tonnes of coal. For the record, under a state Labor government, in the last few years 30 resources projects have been approved. For the record, we're going to make Gladstone ground zero for hydrogen expansion and development in Australia. For the record, we're going to invest in a new network of pipelines to provide cheap energy for manufacturing around Australia.

We're not going to put all our eggs in one basket. And what we're going to do, is make sure that the rules are followed. And talking of the rules, what on earth is Mr Morrison doing by not launching a judicial inquiry into the growing scandal around the allocation of $80 million to Eastern Australia Agricultural Services. He should stop running and hiding, stop backing up ministers where we have no line of sight in the decisions that have been made. Every day goes by, the suspicions grow, but I put Mr Morrison on notice. It won't be good enough if you just want to have some administrative tick box review. I believe that unless the department provides all of the paper work, not with a big black Texta marking out all the interesting details, but the fair dinkum paperwork, without the redactions, without the secret squirrel business which this government loves. It should be a judicial inquiry where you have got the power to compel witnesses and you have got the power to get to the bottom. Not some sort of administrative review, which you want to have when you actually don't want to have a review, but you you’re just seen to have a review.
 
JOURNALIST: If you become the Prime Minister, will the CFMEU be allowed to enforce closed shops on construction sites, no ticket no work?
 
SHORTEN: No. And let's just be clear on that. No. We think that the problem in Australia is that everything is going up except your wages. And we want to see enterprise bargaining resuscitated.
 
We want to see a crackdown on dodgy labour hire. We welcome temporary skilled guest labour in this country but not when it becomes an excuse for not training Australians and for employing people in exploitative cheap labour arrangements which undermine the jobs security and lead to a very poor experience for guest workers.
 
JOURNALIST: Could the resurrection of Clive Palmer cost you the election?

SHORTEN: Listen I'm not going to get - sorry, there's only one person who has ever been resurrected and I'm not going to compare Clive Palmer to him. The point about it is, I'm not going to get distracted by Clive Palmer. If you want better health care in this country, vote Labor. If you want to get wages moving in this country again, vote Labor. If you want the pensioners to get a better deal, vote Labor. If you want to tackle the cost of living, vote Labor. If you want to make sure your three and four year olds get quality child care and it is not exorbitantly expensive, vote Labor. That's our game, the primary vote.

JOURNALIST: On George Christensen, what do you think he was doing in the Philippines for 294 days?

SHORTEN: I think that is one of the questions of the ages. The member for Manila, but Jason's been our representative in northern Australia so I might get him to talk further.
 
CLARE: Well I'll tell you what he wasn't doing, he wasn't doing his job. This bloke has to be the laziest politician in Australia. Two hundred and ninety four days overseas on holidays in the last four years. That's two hundred and ninety four days where he's not doing his job. That's what I call lazy. And not just lazy, at the same time all of this was happening, he was putting ads in the local paper in Gladstone, after Cyclone Debbie, creating the false impression that he was actually there doing his job. So he's not just lazy, he was deceptive. I don't know about you, but if you take two hundred and ninety four days off on holidays, in the last four years, I don't think you deserve to keep your job. I bet the blokes behind us, if they took two hundred and ninety four days off in four years, their boss wouldn't keep them on, and then create the false impression they were actually at work, and lie to the boss, because that's what he's done, he's lied to the people of Dawson. What I think would be just is if the people of Dawson, in a couple of weeks’ time, send George Christensen on a permanent holiday, because that's what he deserves.

JOURNALIST: LNP candidate Gerard Rennick has been caught spreading conspiracy theories about climate change and some curious ideas about your preschool policy. What action, if any, should be taken against the candidate, and can you guarantee you would also apply that same standard to any of your candidates caught in a similar situation?
 
SHORTEN: To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate believes three year old child care is a political conspiracy. To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate is a supporting a 12 per cent corporate tax rate, which is a massive tax cut for the big end of town. And certainly no Labor candidate believes that the Bureau of Meteorology is engaged in some conspiracy to hide the facts on climate change. The LNP has got a factory at an undisclosed location where they can find candidates so out of touch with the real world it is remarkable. Now what sort of serious policies is Mr. Morrison offering Australia when they're running a candidate in a winnable position who believes that the Bureau of Meteorology's engaged in a conspiracy to not tell the truth on climate change? This is the problem with the LNP, they're divided, they're chaotic, they are held together by sticky tape and rubber bands. Mr Morrison should distance himself from the madness of some of the views we are seeing from some of the LNP but he can't, can he? Because he is a captive of the hard right of the Liberal Party and he's never satisfactorily explained why Malcolm Turnbull is still not Prime Minister of Australia.
 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask Mr Beers a question about the Adani project. Mr Shorten saying that he has no plans to review approvals is hardly ruling a review out. What do you think of that and is this hurting the chances of you winning the seat?

BEERS: When we talk about projects like Adani, our position has always been clear. If it stacks up environmentally and financially, it should go ahead. In relation to coal mining more broadly though the real issues that are hurting Central Queensland, the real issues that are hurting Flynn, are the issues in the industrial relations landscape.
 
We talk about issues like casualisation, like the misuse of labour hire, like a broken industrial relations system that is skewed to the employer side so far that workers can't get a pay rise. Those are the issues that people in central Queensland are worried about and those are the issues that coal miners here in Flynn are worried about.
 
So when we talk about this issue, and I appreciate there is a fixation on it, Labor's position has been very clear for a long time. When I am talking to people in Flynn what they're worried about is a secure job, being able to put food on the table, being able to feed their family and make sure that when they wake up in the morning they still have a job to go to. Those are the issues I'm focussed on and those are the issues that matter to people here in the Flynn.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, I have a question for you and also a question for Mr Beers as well.

SHORTEN: Oh, two questions, OK.
 
JOURNALIST: Related. So you are confirming that you are not going to sign this CFMEU pledge to not stand in the way of Adani. I just want to get clarity on that. And Mr Beers, you did sign this pledge. Why did you do that, and should Bill Shorten sign it?

SHORTEN: First of all on the pledge, no I am not going to sign it. But you can deduce from that nothing other than I am not going to sign a pledge. We're very clear. For us, resources projects have to stack up scientifically and they have to stack up without requiring taxpayer money. That's how we think. That is our policy.
 
But I, for one, am happy if I've got local candidates who are backing the strong views of their community. To be fair to Zac at this stage in his career he is not running for Prime Minister, although he has got excellent talent as I think you are already seeing. I'm running for Prime Minister of Australia. The thing which is really annoying Australians is short term politics. You go this way and that way. Well that is not for me. What we will do is adhere to the law, no sovereign risk, back the science.

BEERS: In relation to the pledge, I'm not sure how many people have actually read the pledge. But it talks about the very issues I just spoke about. It talks about our commitment to support mining projects that stack up environmentally and financially.
 
It talks about our commitment to end the misuse of casual labour and the misuse of labour hire and make sure we restore fairness to the industrial relations landscape. So these are issues that are at the heart of our values here in central Queensland. So I have no issue signing the pledge. And Bill's position has been clear on this stuff all along, so he doesn't need to reiterate that.
 
From my perspective I signed that pledge because it reflects the views of the people that I represent. I will fight every day to make sure that workers in central Queensland start getting a fair go. When we stand up, taking on multinationals like Glencore. The LNP, let's be clear, when workers that were locked out at Oaky North went down to Canberra, the LNP laughed and mocked those workers, workers that were locked out of their workplace. I'll stand up for those sorts of workers every day of the week to make sure they start getting a fair go and the pledged I signed reflects that values.

JOURNALIST: The ACTU wants to see the minimum wage rise by $50 a week. Is that the sort of increase you want to see?

SHORTEN: I will get Brendan to supplement the answer. We are not going to pick a final number but I will state this. The current adult wage for an adult is too low. It is too low. So we do want to see a rise. Under the Liberals we're experiencing massive wage stagnation. The last thing this government wants to do is talk about wages. But this election is a referendum on the cost of living and of course wage stagnation.
 
Of course the ACTU wants to see a movement in the minimum wage and an improvement in the wages situation. Let me remind you of some numbers which Australian households know very well. And I want to say to the Australian people today - I understand the costs of child care have increased massively. I understand the cost of going to see the doctor, the out of pockets, has increased. I understand that energy prices have gone up. I understand that wages are standing still or going backwards in the case of cuts to penalty rates and other sectors of the economy. I understand that people are dipping into their household savings to make ends meet. That's why Labor has a wages policy. It's a gaping hole in the government's re-election campaign that they do not have a wages policy. Mathias Cormann, the  
right-hand numbers man of Mr Morrison, the current Prime Minister, made it very clear that low wages are part of the economic architecture of this government. If you want to keep low wages in Australia and you want to keep wages stagnant and if you want to keep falling behind cost of living, then this government has got a plan for you but if you want to get ahead in life, this government hasn't got a plan. Over to Brendan.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Just to supplement that answer by Bill. Look I think the ACTU have every right to put a case on behalf of workers in this country. We don't agree with the amount that they have proposed because we believe that the independent umpire should, having listened to all the arguments, decide the outcome.
 
But what we have decided in relation to a living wage, firstly, is we've said we'll elevate cost of living as a factor to be considered by the independent umpire because the last Fair Work decision on the National Wage Review last year, made clear that we have in this country, a relatively wealthy country, full-time workers that are still struggling to make ends meet. Actually below the poverty line in terms of income. That is unacceptable to Labor. That's why we've made very clear we want to see a real wage increase and we want to see the minimum wage in this country be a living wage. Now, I think that's very, very - I think it's the right way to go. We fully respect the ACTU and, for that matter, employers to put their views. But we are clear on our view and that is a real wage increase.
 
We made a submission this year, a real wage increase for 2.2 million award employees, we want to see that. That's why yesterday Bill made very clear that an incoming Labor Government, if we're elected, if we're lucky enough to be elected - and we want to be elected of course - will use the full weight and authority of the Commonwealth to make clear that it's about time Australians got a real pay increase.

JOURNALIST: How do you expect small businesses to cope with the costs that you're loading them up with, with these increases?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we've always made clear that whatever outcome occurs should be after consultation and negotiation with business including small business.
 
You would think from the government's hysteria about giving workers a wage rise this is the first time in the history of the nation there has ever been a wage rise. The problem is that in the past there used to be regular wage rises. Now it's stalled. Small business survived in the past. Isn't it about time we called out the sort of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, Scott Morrison nonsense that if you give a worker a decent wage somehow it's the end of our economy as we know it? Rubbish.
 
When it comes to small business let me just say this. We're a much better deal for Australian small business. I noticed today the government's reheated last year's leftovers where they boldly told you all today a policy they announced last November and said, "Hey, presto, it's new." It's not. They actually said it last year. They're selling you last week's newspaper as this week's fish and chip wrappers. But what Labor is going to do is we've matched that policy last year, so that's great, no difference there.
 
But we are billions of dollars better for small business because we are introducing the Australian Investment Guarantee. It means that any business in Australia, big or small, if they want to invest in productive new capital and technology, they can claim an extra 20 per cent on the first day they purchase it. Port buys a new crane, that's an expensive undertaking. So they weigh up the cost-benefit. Under our proposals, 20 per cent extra you can deduct on tax. That's worth $3.8 billion over the next four years.
 
Now we think that’s worth helping business in, including small business, because what we get, what the taxpayer gets for giving that deduction to business is that they see a productive investment. When you add that on, the fact that we have matched the government on lowering the tax rate for small business, we've matched the government on the instant asset write-off, and when you look how in different sectors, from dairy farmers to mechanics, we've got specifically calibrated policies to help small business. What we say to small business is don't believe the government's scare campaign, look at the detail of our promises. The other thing I would say in favour of modest and meaningful wage rises is what that actually means is that the customers of small business have more money to spend in the small businesses.

JOURNALIST:  Can I ask you a question about costs because costs have started to become a theme of the press conference. We don't have an answer to the cost for small businesses when it comes to lifting wages because we don't know how much you would like to lift wages. Small businesses and businesses at large don't have an answer as to how much they are going to be hit to meet your emissions reduction target. When will we start to learn a little bit more about your electric vehicle target and the cost to households and businesses there?

SHORTEN: OK let's go through each of those three points very briefly. There is a cost to Australian business when wage earners are experiencing wage stagnation. It means a decline in confidence. So there is an absolute negative cost. If working people in this country are not getting reasonable wage rises they stop spending money because they don't have it. That is the cost, confidence.
 
Now you went on to talk about climate, as I thought you might. So Mr Warwick McKibbin - I don't know if he is still in Africa on his safari, but he published an article in the Australian Financial Review today. And he makes it very clear that the debate about cost, a specific mythical number which I advised you of last week, he said it isn't the main game.
 
What he said to do is you have got to compare the cost of not taking action on climate change in 2030 with the cost of taking climate action. And what he said is have a look at the detailed policies. Labor's got policies. So let's once and for all, and McKibbin himself, has put a stake into that argument. It's the wrong question. Now we want to talk about electric - you asked three questions, I'll just go to your third one and then I will share the joy with everyone else.
 
On electric vehicles we are not mandating. If you don't want to buy an electric vehicle in 2030, don't. But what we are saying is we know that the rest of the world are building more car models with electric engines. We know that they are not putting the same investment into internal combustion. So let's just kill off this scare campaign once and for all. Labor doesn't mind what car you drive. But what I do mind is if we have got a government, a climate-denying, stuck in the past, technophobic government afraid of new technology denying Australians new car models and cheaper options in terms of petrol and maintenance which we see from this.
 
And while we are on the issue of scare campaigns I want to call out the latest bit of rubbish from the government lie machine. And that is the so-called death tax. There is actually only one leader who has never ruled out a death tax and that is the current Prime Minister. We know that this fellow, the current Prime Minister, he loves to get on the high moral ground, but then what he does is he behaves in the exact opposite manner, with no skerrick of truth. Labor has never had any plan for a death tax under my leadership nor does it have any plan for a death tax. But what this fellow wants to do is he knows it is a lie, he is intentionally telling a lie, but the old ad man doesn't care. So we will call out the ridiculous propaganda.
 
And the other thing is, the other scare campaign is the Greens. Look at the Greens running around saying they are going to tell Labor what to do. My party is 120 years old. We are the party who looks and focuses on working and middle class Australians. We are not going to take a lecture from the Green political party whoever since they have come on the scene has put the cause of environmental change back because they take it to the extreme margins. We are the only party focussed on getting a sustainable environment but making sure that working and middle class people don't get left behind.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Greens, they want to end coal mining by 2030. Some in Queensland would say that is an extreme policy. Would you be willing to preference them below the Coalition?

SHORTEN: First of all it’s a silly policy and it’s a policy that isn't going to happen. In terms of the Greens, what I say to them next time they catch a tram - trams run on steel. Steel is made through a process of using metallurgical coal. I don't think they quite know sometimes where it all comes from. But that shouldn't be used as an argument, that should not be used as an argument not to take action on climate change. And I do think that we need to actually move towards more renewable energy in our system.
 
We've got to deal with the fact that we have got a government who are climate deniers. And you have got some of the extreme Greens who think that you can, you know, change the world on just the click of a finger. Thanks everyone. I should say I am going to address the workers now. The port has been very good to get them to stop to listen to us. I've no doubt they have found this terribly informative and you are all welcome to come to the meeting which we are having with the workers. Thank you.

ELIDA FAITH, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LEICHHARDT: Welcome everybody to Cairns, it is a beautiful day. My family and myself would like to welcome Bill and Chloe to Cairns and our home. Far North Queensland is very unique, we have two World Heritage Listed areas. We’ve got the Daintree Rainforest and we have the beautiful Great Barrier Reef. Now 2 million tourists come and visit us every year, domestic and international and we have 69,000 jobs that rely on those tourists that come here to see our natural wonders. Now under the LNP Government, we have seen threats to our Great Barrier Reef and we have seen threats to our regional jobs. And I am really proud to say, while I am standing here today that only Labor has a great plan to protect our Great Barrier Reef and only Labor has a plan to grow our regional jobs. Not just for this generation but for my daughter's generation. And I am going to hand over now to Bill, thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, that is Elida Faith, Labor’s candidate running in Leichhardt. Before we get onto the exciting new announcements that we are making for tourism and the bush around Australia and protecting the reef I think it is important that my first comments go towards yet again, expressing my and Labor's solidarity with the people of Sri Lanka, my and Labor's solidarity with Sri Lankan Australians. Chloe and I were at church in Brisbane yesterday like many hundreds of thousands of Australians. Like many tens and hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankan worshippers. It is unthinkable that people at prayer should be the subject of this cowardly terror attack. And we stand with Sri Lankan Australians, they're a mighty community, and we stand with Sri Lanka. I had the opportunity to talk to a family down at the ticket box at the start of the Skyrail. They're very proud Sri Lankan Australians, a family with a daughter. They know they live in a great country Australia because it is so safe, but they expressed their sadness, their family are okay back in Colombo. But their sadness, they thought that after 20 years of war, this violence and terror was behind them in Sri Lanka and that tourism was up. Clearly, there are always evil people amongst us who seek to drag people back into shocking violence and our solidarity and sympathy is with the people of Sri Lanka.

Going to a more positive note, I'm here with Elida and Tony Burke and Brendan O'Connor, we're here to announce a number of exciting propositions for regional Australia and the Great Barrier Reef. This is an iconic part of Australia where rainforest meets reef. Labor's very committed to regional tourism. Regional tourism is a jobs driver for Queensland and it's a jobs driver across Australia. 43 cents in every dollar that the Australian tourism industry earns is earned in the regions of Australia. We want to see a greater investment in the regions so that the great Australian story of the regions can be shared around Australia and also with people all around the world. So we're announcing great new initiatives in regional tourism - upgrading airports, upgrading existing tourism venues, creating new tourism experiences and putting more money into marketing the Australian story, the Australian regional tourism story in Australia and beyond our shores. But apart from regional tourism and the $250 million package, which will generate thousands and thousands of new jobs, Tony Burke and I are here today because the Great Barrier Reef is under threat. And this current Government has not done anything to help properly save the reef. So today, we announce that we are going to engage in reef rescue and that starts by taking back most of the money which was given in half an hour to a private trust, and we're going to take that $440 million back and we're going to spend it on Government experts, the CSIRO, working with local communities. The Great Barrier Reef is one of the seven natural wonders of the world. All Australians are so lucky to have the reef working so hard for us. Now it's time that we work hard for the reef. We are going to take that money back, talk to the locals, talk to the science experts and make sure that we genuinely save the reef - not make dodgy decisions giving money to private philanthropic trusts.
 
Before I hand over to Brendan, go to a third and final proposition for today, which is very important as we're in the middle of the Easter-Anzac Day holiday period. New reports out today show that the cuts to penalty rates in Australia are having a massive impact on the wages of hundreds of thousands of Australian workers. Evidence demonstrates that the penalty rate cuts which have already been implemented, and the ones which are scheduled to be implemented under the LNP, or the Liberals, if they get returned to power, we'll see people losing up to $27,000 in the next three years. Thousands and thousands of dollars are being cut from people's wages. What we see is wage stagnation. I want to be very clear to Australians: I understand what's happening. Everything's going up in cost of living. But not people's wages. Everything's going up but wages. The current Government love to talk about a strong economy, but I have got news for them on behalf of millions of Australians. When you have got cuts to schools and hospitals, when you have the cost of living on everything from childcare to health and energy going up, and massive wage cuts like the penalty rate cuts that we've seen, that does not equal a strong economy. That just means the rich are getting richer under Morrisons Australia. Well Labor is not going to stand for that, not only are we going to reinstate the penalty rates that have been arbitrarily cut, but I'm pleased to announce for the first time today here, that if Labor is elected, we are going to use the full force of the Commonwealth advocacy to make a submission to the national wage case to get wages moving in a modest and meaningful way. I'll gather the Cabinet together straight away if we are elected, we'll work through the issues. We're going to use the full force of Commonwealth advocacy to support a wage improvement, a wage increase, for 2.2 million Australians. We will make the case to the independent umpire. The Government's had six years to demonstrate they're fair dinkum on wages. They're just not. Wages are at a record low. Since the last election when Mr Turnbull was leader of the Liberal Party to now, corporate profits have gone up 39 per cent. But wages have only gone up 5 per cent. The Liberals have had six years to demonstrate they're on the side of millions of wage earners and they failed that test. We won't. We're going to restore the penalty rates, and a Government I lead will make a full-throated, full-bodied submission to the independent umpire where the Commonwealth of Australia, the Government of Australia, elected by the people, is going to back the people and support wage rises for everyday Australians.
 
I'd now like to hand over to Brendan to talk about this and then Tony to talk about the reef and other important matters.
 
BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Thanks very much, Bill. As Bill made clear, this is an election that's so important for many people in this country. For people that are suffering with stagnant wages. We have a situation where, as a result of the failure of Scott Morrison and the Liberals, to support Bill Shorten's private member's Bill into the Parliament, we are seeing wages being cut in fast food, hospitality, retail, pharmacy. And what the new forecast shows is that if Scott Morrison and the Liberals are re-elected, we're going to see workers in those sectors lose anywhere between $9,000 and $26,000 over the next three years. I mean, the fact is that Scott Morrison is the king of cuts. Cuts to schools, cuts to hospitals, cuts to NDIS, and cuts to penalty rates. And it's not by accident. It is not by accident and we know that because his Finance spokesperson, Mathias Cormann, made that very clear recently in an interview that he gave when he said that low wages is a deliberate design feature of the economic plan. A deliberate design feature to keep wages low. This at a time when wage growth is at the lowest on record, and yet, no redress, no effort by the Government to do anything about that. Well, the Governor of the Reserve Bank said that this is not just a problem for households and workers. It's a problem for our economy. That's why Bill has made an announcement about our submission to the National Wage case. That's why, if elected, a Shorten Labor Government will restore penalty rates as they were on 30 June 2017. That will mean those workers will not suffer thousands and thousands of dollars taken out of their wages over the next three years because if we don't see a change of Government, that's what's going to happen.
 
TONY BURKE MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER: Thanks very much. If elected a Shorten Labor Government will act in protection of the Great Barrier Reef. The Great Barrier Reef is the most precious and the most fragile of environmental assets on the planet and we're the custodians of it. That's too important of a job to be outsourced to a small private foundation. Labor will act on climate change and water quality. Labor, a Shorten Labor Government, will engage closely with Traditional Owners in the Great Barrier Reef Marine catchment and a Shorten Labor Government will cooperate with all levels of government. Importantly - if elected, we will use the clause of the contract that allows us to demand the - what is left of the $444 million plus the interest that's been earnt to be returned to the Commonwealth Government so that it can be spent on programs run through Commonwealth agencies, not outsourced to a small private foundation.
 
I should also let you know given it's been running over the last couple of days over the public holidays with respect to the Murray Darling Basin. I have written today to the Secretary of the Department that's responsible, the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources, that is responsible for buybacks. The Department on Saturday issued an extraordinary media release during the caretaker period. In that media release, they listed in defence of water buybacks that have taken place when Barnaby Joyce was Minister, a series of due diligence documents that they obtained. Many of those documents have not been released publicly and if they had been released, they're heavily redacted. In the letter to the Secretary of the Department, I have asked that by close of business tomorrow, those documents be made public. On the face of it, it looks like for flood water that only exists in very rare circumstances that effectively they have paid top dollar for it. You don't pay Versace prices for water that you get from the Reject Shop and that looks like what Barnaby Joyce has done. So we need that information to be made public. There are also questions that I put out on Thursday night that I asked for Scott Morrison to answer by close of business today. There’s a series of questions there that go to the integrity of this entire process, some of them have matched the documents that I asked the Department to release. We need to make sure that the implementation of the plan happens according to the law of the plan and in the spirit of the plan. We know that Barnaby Joyce tried to undermine it at every turn and we need to get to the bottom of that. The questions that we’ve asked Scott Morrison to answer by the end of the day and the information we have asked for the Department to release by the end of tomorrow, hopefully will provide the answers that are currently lacking.
 
JOURNALIST: So are you questioning the credibility of the Department, considering they said it was a fair market price that was paid?
 
BURKE: The information that the Department has put out, if everything that they have put is accurate, then they should have no trouble in releasing publicly all the documents that refer to them. But I think it's reasonable during an election campaign that when a Department makes an extraordinary media release in the middle of a series of public holidays that goes to allegations that had been made against the Minister, not against the Department, that it is completely reasonable for us to demand that all those documents be made public. If in making those documents public it turns out that everything the Department has asserted stacks up entirely, then that's that. But it is quite reasonable, given the controversy that has surrounded Barnaby Joyce, for us to demand for those documents to be made public and the Department should be doing that by close of business tomorrow.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, campaign headquarters dodged questions yesterday about whether you would review Federal Environmental approvals for the Adani coalmine if you become Prime Minister. Tanya Plibersek has also dodged those questions on the weekend. Can we get a clear answer - will you review them and the process involved as well as the approvals themselves?
 
SHORTEN: I don't accept the characterisation that Tanya did what you said she did. With Adani our position is the same as it has been for the last two years and these are our principles: We will be guided by the best science, we will not use any taxpayer money, we will not engage in any sovereign risk, we will adhere to the law of the land.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you review the approval, the approval that, just two days before the election from Melissa Price, will you have another look at them?
 
SHORTEN: We have no plans, but the point about it is this Adani has become a political football. I think everyone, that's probably the only thing that the stop Adani people agree on. If I’m Prime Minister I'm going to be governed by the law, I’m not going to be governed by either a mining company or an environmental activist. That’s what I think people of North Queensland deserve, that's what I think all Australians would expect. The final thing I would make on that, Labor is not putting all its eggs in the Adani basket. If that stacks up it stacks up in the manner in which I have already outlined. Labor is outlining $6 billion worth of infrastructure projects which will create 24,000 jobs right across Queensland. Today's latest announcement about investment in regional tourism, today's latest announcement about prioritising the best science to govern the rescue of the reef is again our commitment not only to create new jobs in North Queensland, but to protect the existing jobs.
 
JOURNALIST: If you win the election, how much of an increase to the minimum wage will Labor support this year?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we'll let the independent umpire decide that, but we aren't going to go missing like this Government has for the last six years. What we're going to do is make a full-bodied submission. I’ll have talked to my Cabinet colleagues. We'll take the soundings from industry, we’ll hear all the points of view, but I think that Australians need a wage rise. We got wages stagnation, productivity growth in Australia is four times what wages are. You got to ask yourself - what sort of country we'll have if the current Government get returned? The penalty rates will remain cut and new cuts have been phased in. Now, this is a Government who loves to talk about a strong economy, but they're only interested in a strong economy for the top end of town. Once you add up what's happening to millions of Australian wage earners, penalty rates cut, wages stagnation, energy bills going up and up and up, out-of-pockets to see the doctor going up and child care, middle-class Australia is getting done over with a lack of interest by this Government in cost of living and wages stagnation.
 
JOURNALIST: If we can go back to the Murray Darling. This isn't the first issue around that system and there is the suggestion particularly from the Greens that Labor needs to commit to a Royal Commission. Is that something you'll commit to or is Labor leaving the door open to a Royal Commission into the Murray Darling.
 
SHORTEN: I’ve got Tony here, so I will get him to supplement this, he's our point man on this. This Murray Darling scandal in my opinion highlights this is a Government not interested in the bush and not interested in climate change, not interested in handing on a better environment to our kids. This summer just passed, December, January, with the massive fish kills, unprecedented, shows there's a crisis. It's not good enough for the Morrison Government to say this is Labor's fault from 2012 or 2013. Mr Morrison and his team have been in power for over 2000 days, and the situation in the Murray Darling is going from bad to worse. In terms of a Royal Commission, let's see what the Department provides in the next 24 hours, but I might get Tony to talk further about the scandal in the Murray Darling Basin and how it is damaging our future.

BURKE: Everything that happened from the moment that Barnaby Joyce took on the water portfolio amounted to chaos. The Murray Darling basin plan was meant to provide a bipartisan way forward, and an orderly way forward. And yet what we've seen is chaos from the Government. Right at this moment there are questions that we are asking the Prime Minister to answer, and questions that we are asking the Department to answer. The reason there are so many questions floating around at the moment is the chaos that has occurred here. We will wait until we see what those answers come back as before we're able to give a definitive answer on what you've referred to there, but be in no doubt: it matters whether or not this was value for money, it matters that it wasn't done through a tender process. Even the Department's release has said that the Government chose a multinational company based in the Cayman Islands rather than family farmers who otherwise might have wanted to transact with the Government. This is chaos, it is extraordinary, we'll wait until we see what happens when these questions are answered, presuming that they are.
 
JOURNALIST: What about Labor's record, though, Mr. Burke, the Prime Minister has just said that EAA was a company that the previous Labor Government has dealt with and this arrangement was dwarfed by the amounts committed under the previous Government?
 
BURKE: The water that I purchased was through public tenders. All the water that was purchased from the time the plan was put in place was through public tenders. This was not through a public tender. And that's why so many questions are being asked. Previously, when water - and some water was purchased right at the start not through public tenders, but that was before we had a plan in place. Once you have a plan in place, you have capped the total amount of water that is going to be acquired for the environment. Having done that, what Barnaby Joyce appears to have done is to go off and got the lowest quality water he could, that will only be around once every ten years. Now there may be an explanation for this. So far the Government haven't offered it, the Department haven't offered it, and we need those answers.

JOURNALIST: Just to be clear, with the Adani groundwater decisions that were made just before the election was called, is Labor ruling out reviewing those decisions, and if you're not ruling it out, in what circumstances would you see those decisions being reviewed?
 
SHORTEN: The process is not concluded with the Queensland Government, that's the first point to make. So the ball is really in the Queensland Government's court. The second point I'll make is, we'll back the science, we'll adhere to the law, we're not going to use taxpayer money, we're not going to engage in sovereign risk. What I'll also need to just briefly make the point here is - what's the Government doing? The Federal Government, if they're so fair dinkum, why have they taken so long, and why are they keeping Melissa Price in witness protection?
 
JOURNALIST: Can you rule out the review, Mr Shorten? Secondly, you continue to say you'll wait to see if Adani stacks up, do you want it to stack up?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, it's not what I want that's going to make a difference, if I'm Prime Minister…
 
JOURNALIST: Voters want to know.
 
SHORTEN: Sure. What I'll do as Prime Minister is adhere to the law. I'm not going to be a cheer squad for one or the other, I'm not in that caravan coming from the south, and I'm not in the cheer squad which says that don't worry about the science. If I'm the Prime Minister I'll adhere to the best science and the best law. In terms of the review, I'll just adhere to the law, that's why we have laws in this country. And another point I made earlier which deserves a little more emphasis. I'm not going to engage in sovereign risk - and I understand that people want to litigate one way or the other, and let's also talk about the bigger picture here, which is coal. Coal will be part of our energy mix going forward, but we're going to have more renewables. This cannot be an excuse for a debate by the Government into what they're not doing on climate change, that's why we're here announcing a rescue for the reef.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten you've accused Coalition Members of bullying Mrs. Price over that decision she made just before the election, doesn't that suggest that there was a problem with that process and therefore why wouldn't there be a review?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I'm just going off what I've read in the newspapers. It certainly seemed to be a ramshackle process, but we're just going to adhere to the law. What investors in this country want to know is, does the rule of law apply? What people who care about the environment want to know is, is there going to be respect for the environment and more action on climate change? Only Labor offers that alternative. On the environmental activist side, they say sometimes ignore the law, can't do that, won't do that. And some of the boosters for this particular project, say, oh don't worry about if it all stacks up, just get on and do it. Life's not that simple actually, what we need in this country is stability. The fact of the matter is, that this is a divided Government, the fact of the matter is they had all these arguments, even as, on the eve of the election and that's just not the way laws or investment or the environment should be looked after.

JOURNALIST: Your letter to Martin Parkinson about the latest politicisation of the bureaucracy, will there be a night of the long knives under a Shorten Government to hack off the heads of these Department Secretaries?
 
SHORTEN: Colourful analogy, but no.

JOURNALIST: Will you keep Martin Parkinson at Prime Minister and Cabinet?
 
SHORTEN: Guys we haven't even won the election yet, so I think if I started saying, X has got a job and Y hasn't, you'd accuse us of arrogance, I do know there's one thing that Martin Parkinson has said, he is the Prime Minister's number one public servant adviser. The principal guy, the one who, you know, the Government go to to check their things. I noticed that he has warned, in a letter to us, that people shouldn't use modelling for misleading purposes, and he's cautioned against anyone thinking that his Department has modelled Labor's policies. What we need in Australia at the moment is less scare campaign and more facts. What we need is a plan for the future. What Labor is offering is real action on climate change, real action on wages, real action on cost of living. These are the things which Australians are talking to me on the campaign trail, and we're focused.
 
JOURNALIST: So Phil Gaetjens for example, would be Treasury Secretary under a Shorten Government?
 
SHORTEN: Again, I'm not getting into who's in and who's out, because that would imply, that somehow I thought we had won the election, that'll be the judgement of the Australian people. But I'll tell you one thing we can put to the judgement of the Australian people, if you want to save the Barrier Reef, vote Labor. If you want to back in regional tourism, vote Labor, and if you want to get your wages moving, for goodness sakes, vote Labor.

JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison is spending a lot of time in Victoria. How confident are you that you will pick up seats there?
 
SHORTEN: Well I'm a Victorian, spent quite a lot of years in Victoria. Listen I think Labor has a good story in Victoria but we've got a good story across Australia, but certainly one thing has been the case for Victorians under this Federal Government, they have not received their fair share of infrastructure investment. This Government hasn't invested in public transport in Melbourne suburbs, they haven't invested in the roads of the South-East. I think voters and it doesn't just go for Victoria should ask themselves a serious question about the Government, what is it they expect the Liberal’s to do now that they haven't done the past six years? And on wages that's a classic example. If you're sick of penalty rates being cut, if you're sick of low wages growth then why don't we get a Government in who has a wages policy, who will sit down with all the parties, sit down with the point of view of business, listen to the workers. But we've got to get wages moving again in this country and today's announcement I'll give you fair notice won't be the only announcement we're making this week about a coherent and sensible wages policy because most Australians are sick of everything going up except wages.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten just on wages you've promised within 100 days if you win power to legislate overturning that Fair Work Commission if what's required to get Senate support for that measure is to legislate a ban on unions trading away penalty's, is that something you're willing to explore?
 
SHORTEN:  Listen I've seen the Greens talk about this stuff. The tail doesn't wag the dog let’s be clear here. We use the word mandate a lot in politics, now I'm going to be very clear though, if we get elected we've got a mandate to change the penalty rates, put them back in in the way the way that Labor has said and indeed we got the vote through the Senate in the current Parliament. The people who are a road block to people getting a reasonable wage rise, helping deal with the cost of living are the Liberals and the Nationals in Canberra.

JOURNALIST:  Would this then lead to small businesses then cutting peoples hours and cutting staff because they can't afford to because they can't afford to pay those extra penalty rates which they've said time and time again that they can't do?
 
SHORTEN: I've got Brendan here so he'll supplement, but we've now had the laboratory of extreme right wing thinking in the real world, it’s no longer just a theory. This Government got the penalty rate cuts that they wanted. They voted eight time against increasing penalty rates back to where they were but let’s have a look at what's happened on Sundays and the public holidays. Under Mr Morrison's theory and Senator Cormann’s architecture of low wages it was going to be a brave new day, a brave new dawn of extra jobs on Sundays and public holidays, that has not happened, that has not happened. The University of Wollongong’s done a study. All that's happened under the Liberals is not that a lot more workers get employed on the days that you had the penalty rates get cut, all that happens is that people suffer wages cuts. I'll just get Brendan to supplement.

O'CONNOR:  Thanks Bill, that's exactly right there is no evidence that there has been a commence or an increase in employment in areas where penalty rates have been cut-
 
JOURNALIST: But do you know if it will lead to people in the industry reinstated?
 
O'CONNOR: Well the University of Wollongong studies show that there's no evidence that there has been a commensurate increase in employment or hours as a result of cutting penalty rates. What's happened instead and that's why we've had the Reserve Bank Governor make very clear his concern about low wage growth. 60 per cent of our economy is made up of household consumption and household consumption is in fact impacted adversely because of stagnant wages and that's feeding into low consumer confidence and low business confidence and in fact the idea that we should race to the bottom on wages to help our economy is completely discredited. We just recently had one hundreds experts, economists across Australia write a letter, a public letter saying we need to lift wages. We've got the Reserve Bank Governor in workers corner, we've got Labor in workers corner, we don't have Scott Morrison in workers corner. He is not supporting, he's supporting $11,000 tax cuts for millionaires as he wants to see increased cuts to workers on low wages in so far as cutting penalty rates. Whether it be fast food workers or retail hospitality workers, those who work in pharmacies, those who are working on days where others get to have leisure time with their family and friends, and what do we do? Do we reward them for that? No. This Government, Scott Morrison, seeks to punish them. Now we've given him an opportunity by introducing a private members bill and on eight occasions he voted against restoring penalty rates. That says everything about Scott Morrison, he wants to cut everything.

JOURNALIST: Does today's announcement mean that you will not seek to legislate changes to the Fair Work Act to increase the minimum wage or will you will just rely on submissions?
 
O'CONNOR: Well what we've made very clear, we recently made an announcement about ensuring that when the Commission considers factors of lifting the minimum wage we're going to make sure we elevate cost of living as a priority that's an important thing but what Bill Shorten announced today is that we're going to make and use the full weight of the Commonwealth to make a submission for a real wage increase. Now why that's important is in the last six years whenever Scott Morrison or all of his predecessors, Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull have made submissions they have never called for a real wage increase. They've either called for no wage increase or an increase with conditions and never a real wage increase. That's one of the reasons in our view, given the weight of the Commonwealth when making submissions. Yes to an independent body but the weight of the Commonwealth has standing and in fact it shows, if you have a Government that actually supports workers and make those statements they are considered very seriously by the Commission and that's what Bill Shorten's declaration and commitment is today, it’s completely different to what we've seen over the last six years. A Government that has said there economic plan includes a deliberate design feature to keep wages low. I mean you can't really get out of that issue. You can't spin yourself out of that line. That is the Finance Minister of this country since the election of a Government in 2013 saying they have put in place a deliberate design feature to keep wages low and one of the ways to do that is to then oppose our legislation to restore penalty rates. Well only a Labor Government, only a Shorten Labor Government, will restore those penalty rates so that those workers do not suffer more and indeed we restore the rate that it was on the 30 June 2017.
 
SHORTEN: I feel that we are reaching the end of this, perhaps I take one more question. I guarantee you on wages we are going to be talking all this week and the rest of the election, because when it comes to what’s happening millions of forgotten middle class Australians, the cost of living is going up, their wages aren’t growing and of course there are cuts to schools and hospitals.

JOURNALIST: On that subject who do you talk about meaningful wage rises, Brendan O'Connor has just talked about a real wage increase which is something above inflation I guess. This is central to your pitch to Australian people, don't they need to know what that actually means in dollar terms, how much of an increase do you want to give an average worker under a Shorten Government?

SHORTEN: We've got several specific proposals and then some of the proposals by nature have to reflect evidence which we will subsequently get from business and from various points of view. But here's some specific numbers. For people who have had their penalty rates cut if we get in you're not going to lose $27,000 if you're a pharmacist over the next three years. If you're a restaurant or accommodation worker you're not going to lose nearly 20,000 plus over the next three years. So if you are asking specific, there's real numbers. What we've seen and over this holiday break all the way from Easter through to Anzac Day, over that ten days, people are losing between $220 - $370 so we're going to fix that straight away. In terms of the living wage and ensuring that we get the wages moving again, I can't give you the specific number because frankly I've got to listen to business, I've got to listen to the evidence from the unions and we've got to have the independent umpire involved in it. But one thing is for sure, the current minimum wage is not enough. But the rate of wage growth for millions of our fellow Australians is not enough, that is why for example we are going to crack down labour hire and start treating people better.

We have got so much to do today, I will see you at the next venue.

ENDS

JOSH BURNS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR MACNAMARA: Welcome to sunny St Kilda, there is nothing better than a sunny day in St Kilda. My name is Josh Burns and I am the Labor candidate for Macnamara and it is my pleasure to introduce and welcome Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition, and of course Brendan O'Connor the Shadow Minister for Workplace Relations and Employment here today. St Kilda is the heart of hospitality here in Melbourne. It is a place where thousands of people come to enjoy the best of what Melbourne has got to offer. But it is also the place where thousands of people work and being the heart of hospitality it has been the heart of penalty rate cuts. That's why it is so important to be here today to talk about how the Labor Party once again is going to be relied on to stand by working people. So with that I am going to introduce the Leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten, to say a few words.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, that was Josh Burns, Labor's candidate for Macnamara. First of all it is great, on an Easter Saturday to be with my family at Luna Park. This is an icon. It’s been continuously in operation for 107 years. What that also reminds me is that all of us over this Easter break are very lucky to have people turning up to work. People who serve us our meals in the hotels, people who look after our rooms in our accommodation if we are travelling away from home. The people indeed who provide the pharmacy work and the shops, the things which we take for granted. Right around Australia there are millions of people working had so the rest of us can enjoy ourselves. That is why we should keep paying people their penalty rates and not arbitrarily cut them. It has been estimated that over this 10 day Easter break, Anzac Day period the workers who have had their penalty rates cut will be losing, in this 10 day period, between $220 and $370 depending which award they are covered by. This is hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians who are working over this 10 day period have literally had up to $370 cut from their pay. This government could have changed that. Not only does this government cut funding to schools, not only does this government cut funding to hospitals, but they also, to show how callous they are, have acquiesced in the cutting of penalty rates. On eight occasions Labor put to the government in a vote, let’s restore the cuts to penalty rates. Eight times Mr Morrison and his team of cutters supported the cuts to penalty rates for the lowest paid workers, young workers, women workers. This is a government that not only doesn’t get it, it just doesn’t care. The finance services minister Mr Cormann put his hand up and he said we support the low wages architecture of Australia. They support cutting penalty rates. Well, there couldn't be a clearer choice in this election. I've said previously this election is an election, it is a referendum on wages. Everything is going up in Australia except people's wages. And the rot stops when we reverse the cuts to penalty rates. We, at our very first piece of legislation, if we get elected, will be to restore the cuts, to replace the cuts, to return the penalty rates back to the workers of Australia. That's what we're going to do first off. We’ve got a plan for wages. All Mr Morrison has is a plan for cuts. Cuts to schools, cuts to hospitals and perhaps worst of all, cuts to people's penalty rates. I would now like to hand over to Brendan O'Connor to talk further about our wages policy, our plan for a fair go for wages, then take questions.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Thanks, Bill. As Bill made clear, this is a priority for an incoming Labor government if we're elected. What we have seen in recent years is the lowest wage growth on record, presided over by Scott Morrison and the Liberals. The lowest wage growth on record. Everything going up except for wages and yet the government, Scott Morrison, wants to see further cuts to penalty rates. So, let's be very clear. Since the decision was made by the Fair Work Commission, Labor responded by introducing a private member’s bill, moved by Bill Shorten, into the  parliament allowing the government to support our position in order to restore those penalty rates for hundreds of thousands of retail and hospitality workers who are doing it tough. They're already doing it tough as I say because it is the lowest wage growth on record, but imagine this - imagine you're in a time of the lowest wage growth on record and you have a government voting eight times to cut pay from hard-working, modestly paid, retail, hospitality, pharmacy workers. It is just really unacceptable. It's fundamentally unfair and only Labor will restore those wages. Restore those penalty rates for those workers. And let's be very clear here. We've had cuts since the 1st of July 2017. We had cuts last year. We will have cuts July 1 this year and the year after that if we don't see a change of government. That's why it is critical people think long and hard. As Bill Shorten has made clear, this election, as much as anything, is a referendum on wages and only Labor will restore those penalty rates and restore people's wages and allow them to make ends meet and get by well.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Brendan. Are there questions?
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Commission was set up for a reason. Is it right for any government of the day to be able to overturn a decision that came from the Fair Work Commission?

SHORTEN: Our position is not taken lightly. We respect the independent umpire, but they got this one wrong. We live in an era of wage stagnation. Australians under this government are going through the longest, lowest period of wages growth since we were keeping records 60 years ago. So as a general rule, you don't want to interfere with the independent umpire's decision, but they got this one wrong. Of course, it is not without precedent. The independent umpire famously got it wrong when they didn't support the introduction of award based superannuation. So, there was no guaranteed minimum super. And indeed, Paul Keating and Bob Hawke stepped in to create universal superannuation as a result. So, whilst what we're doing is as a last  resort, it is not without precedent. But let's look at what this really means. Penalty rates are not a luxury. There's two ways that low paid workers get paid for working the inconvenient hours. Either through a system of penalty rates or tips. Do we really want to go down the American path of workplace relations where a worker, to make, an adult, to make ends meet has to rely on tips and charity and the coins and dollar notes left on the table after the guest has gone? That is not the Australian way. Let's also remember when we talk about penalty rates - the people who get penalty rates by and large are on 30 and 40 and $50,000 a year. Every dollar they get, they spend. And it was promised if you cut penalty rates there would be this new golden era of job creation. Well the University of Wollongong studied this. And we haven't seen an explosion in new jobs. What we have just seen is working people getting the rough end of the stick.

JOURNALIST: Warwick McKibbin who you pinned your climate change costings on last week, he came out today and said that you are wrong to say that international permits can alleviate the cost of your policy because the future of them is too uncertain. Does this put one big hole in your policy?

SHORTEN: No. Listen, I will tell you what we pin our climate change policies on - the best science. I mean, I noticed that some parts of what McKibbin says are selectively quoted by particular newspapers. But he also said, buried in that story, which you didn't go to your question, he said the Morrison government plan would be very expensive. And in yesterday's story, on the Daily Telegraph, he said the cost which The Telegraph trumpeted was a back of the envelope number. Or as we now call it the front of the Telegraph number! Either way the problem that this government has is what they call cost, I call investing. I call investing – like many companies do – in new technology and new opportunities. What this government call cost, I call protecting the future for the kids and the next generation. This government ....

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

SHORTEN: ... the government is obsessed about particular micro propositions. Let's go to the big picture here. Because the big picture is where a nation should be directed towards. The big picture here is at what cost does this government think it’s too expensive to save the planet? Our research is based upon not just the best science, it is also based on consultations with industry. The Business Council of Australia, the business groups, they're the ones who say it makes sense to use international permits. This government used to believe in it. Can we just, we don't suffer from amnesia in this country, so why is it the government thinks we do? Prime Minister Morrison was Treasurer Morrison and when he came up from air from cutting schools and hospitals, he used to back a National Energy Guarantee. Now he doesn't.
 
JOURNALIST:  Why didn't you speak to McKibbin before you reference this report last week? This is what you based your costings on last week and he said you haven't spoken to him about this 4-year-old report?
 
BILL SHORTEN: First of all, the McKibbin report is publicly available, and of course we’ve relied upon it in part, but let's also go further here. You all know what the government's doing. This has been a ten year torture on climate change, where the climate has got worse, the extreme weather events have got worse, and this government is still trying to delay and discourage. Here is a bet, here’s a bet I'll make you. Future generations are going to despise the politicians right now who refuse to take action on climate change.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you rule out a death tax?
 
BILL SHORTEN:  Yes. I was in Proserpine in January, doing one of my many visits to regional Queensland and after, I forget which particular scare campaign the government had whistled up, I said I bet you this government is so desperate, they will try and create a ridiculous death tax scare. Well, you know, truth imitates our press conferences there. They did exactly that. It is a lie. It is a lie. It is a lie. And I think the Liberal Party need to be ashamed of themselves using low rent, American-style fake news which is actually a lie and then trying to scare different communities in Australia.
 
JOURNALIST: What can you tell us about the $80 million water sale, that has hit headlines this week? Do you have concerns about that purchase that the government made and if so, what are those concerns or what are the questions that you have?
 
BILL SHORTEN: This water scandal is really, really, really starting to come to light, isn't it? This was the nation's biggest water purchase, the most expensive water purchase and now we're seeing question marks about the probity of it. You have got the particular minister, Mr Taylor. You know, he used to make a living from working with this company, goes into parliament and then the company gets a super contract. A lot more questions to answer here. And by the way, why this is relevant to the Australian people is this is a lot of taxpayer money. Probity questions as far as the eye can see. But even more importantly than that, our river system is stuffed and it is stuffed because this is a government who hasn't had a plan to look after the whole of the river basin. It has played favourites. It has pursued particular commercial agendas, and as a result, Australia's mighty Murray-Darling is on the critical list. This is the problem. That's why we should have a national anti-corruption commission too.
 
JOURNALIST: So Mr. Shorten, be specific. What does the Prime Minister need do with regard to the water problem right now in the middle of an election campaign to set it right? What can, and should, he do?
 
BILL SHORTEN: Produce all the documents. All the documents. You have got to answer: is this the right process? I think I would be interested to hear if Mr Turnbull, former Prime Minister Turnbull, knew what his ministers were doing or whether or not they were going rogue? I do think that this is an inquiry which today the Prime Minister needs to say one thing: is he completely confident that everything is above board? Is he going to stake his reputation on whether or not all of these matters have been done above board? And if he is, then he needs to come clean with all of the detail.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, costs on your emission reduction target, you said you have spoken about the government and you said it was going to be very large. It can only make sense by reason that your target is much higher than the government's, so that it must be larger, and those costs are going to go passed on to companies who have to buy carbon credits, and those costs are then going to be passed on to consumers. Why can't you say what the dollar figure is, that businesses are going to be asked to pay when it comes to buying those credits, so that consumers can understand what it is going to cost them. Can you give us a single figure on what it is going to cost, sir?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, when we talk about this, the assumption in your question wasn’t correct. What you said there is you compared their policy and ours. But the costing even done by McKibbin acknowledges that the government's policy doesn't take into account the use of international credit offsets, whereas ours does. So we are comparing different propositions. In terms of ours, we're very clear: our policy will not cost the taxpayer. The current government is paying billions of dollars in an emissions reduction fund.
 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible}
 
SHORTEN: No, I am explaining it. To take it through, the emissions reduction fund of the government means your taxes, my taxes, everyone's taxes, get used to pay big polluters not to pollute. That is a clear cost. We are not raising a tax, we are not seeking to spend taxpayer money to pay big emitters not to emit. In terms of business, our cost is comparable to the government's. We are using the same approach of industrial safeguards. And we are allowing businesses, and we are going to support the trade-exposed sector, so we do have $300 million which we are contributing to help cement and steel and aluminium, and other emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries.
 
JOURNALIST: It’s not an answer, do you have a figure as to what it’s going to cost for businesses, who will pass that cost onto consumers? Because there has to be a dollar figure.
 
SHORTEN: We know that this doesn’t happen now, because we are using the same system the Government use. The Government actually have in place, you are probably aware, a system where if you emit more than a certain number of tonnes of carbon pollution into the air, the government has … the companies have to pay for that. The way that companies are defraying that is by investing in new technology, they are better at measuring what they do. What that consequentially means is we are using the same system, so of course over time, as companies reduce their carbon emissions, the cost to companies goes down. But every company has got a different story; every company has a different approach to doing it. So there is no one mythical figure. The point about it is, that we either tackle climate change or we don’t. The problem with answering your question is simply this: your question makes no allowance for the impact of climate change. How much do you offset the cost of getting a company to stop polluting the environment against the cost of extreme weather events. Your question is only part of the equation.
 
JOURNALIST:  But do you concede that that cost would be passed on to consumers?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think that the cost of climate change is now being passed onto consumers.
 
JOURNALIST: But it is going to be much bigger.
 
SHORTEN: Well no, that’s where we fundamentally disagree. What I disagree with is simply this, and then we will move on. When you have a terrible climate event, that cost gets passed on. When you have energy bills going up under the current government, because we don’t have a policy, that cost gets passed on. I agree with Mr Turnbull and what Mr Morrison said back in 2017, a National Energy Guarantee makes sense, and that will actually improve household bills by $550.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you pursue the NEG in government if the opposition is opposed to it …
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, we think that that’s a good framework. The reason why we’ll pursue the National Energy Guarantee is I think Australians are over climate change wars. I know that government loves to pound out its scare campaign, but what scares Australians more is not dealing with climate change. So what we’ll do is we’ll use some of the Turnbull, Morrison, Frydenberg architecture, and we will work with that structure. I’d be amazed if the opposition, the Liberals if they lose the election, that they’ll continue to oppose climate change. The good news is that if Labor wins the election, I think we can put to an end the toxic climate change debate, we can prove that this nation is ready to adopt new technology, embrace more new jobs, create economic growth and lower power prices.
 
JOURNALIST: If we can keep on climate change for just a little bit longer, you have dismissed the $25 billion figure and the $60 billion dollar figure that was put out; you say that the Government’s policies are going to be expensive. So you have looked at the economic cost and not necessarily the cost-benefit analysis, but just the cost of certain policies. The benefit is quite a way away. Do you know just the cost to the economy, not to the government and not to taxpayers coffers, on businesses, on the economy of your policies.
 
SHORTEN: Our policies will be a net benefit for the economy. We believe that if you invest in making climate change changes now, and lowering carbon pollution, this will benefit the economy. I don’t accept that acting on climate change has a cost. I believe not acting on climate change has a cost. You’re looking at some of the inputs, I’m looking at what we get for the end of the process.
 
JOURNALIST: $165 million dollars today on health expenditure, in regional Australia and in Westmead Hospital in Sydney Mr Shorten, not from Labor, but from the Prime Minister. Having gone so hard on health for so long in this campaign, you’d applaud that wouldn’t you?
 
SHORTEN: Well, on the cystic fibrosis announcement, absolutely. We’re very supportive of that. CF is a dreadful disease. But in terms of the Government announcing $100 million dollars on cancer, I remember the last two weeks. This government has viciously attacked me for trying to tackle the out of pocket costs of cancer. Now what this government has done is belatedly realise cancer is real issue in the community. Individually they may have known it, but collectively as a government, the current prime minister got out there and day after day attacked me for wanting to reduce the out of pocket costs of cancer treatment. It’s good that they’re going to do some more in the regions. After all, Labor said we’re going to put $250 million dollars into reducing waiting lists, $500 million into tackling public hospital cancer support and we have put a total package of $2.3 billion into tackling cancer over the next four years. The government can’t have it both ways. They can’t say on one hand that we’re stupid to be tackling cancer, and then on the other hand, expect a whole bunch of flowers for doing 1/25th of what we’re doing.
 
JOURNALIST:  What questions do say that government needs to answer over the $80 million dollar water deal?
 
SHORTEN: First question is, is the prime minister satisfied with the probity of all the decisions. And if he is, will he agree to an audit, or a commission of enquiry, to demonstrate that the questions being raised are not valid. He needs to come clean. He needs to say does he 100 per cent guarantee Barnaby Joyce’s actions? Does he 100 per cent guarantee everything Angus Taylor did? And if he does, he needs to demonstrate to the public why he is so confident in these matters. In terms of just finishing this up, Tim made a point. Yes, where the government does something good on health, I’m going to back it in. It’s a shame the government doesn’t have the shame view towards us, the same commitment. But that’s the sort of prime minister I’ll be. Where someone else has a good idea, I’ll back it in. The National Energy Guarantee. Don’t think it was perfect, but I think people are sick of the us versus them rubbish which masquerades as Australian politics. On health care, cystic fibrosis, tick. But why won’t the Prime Minister back in our $2.3 billion commitment on cancer? Why won’t he back in our reductions to waiting lists today? Newspapers are reporting that waiting lists have blown out under this government. I’ll tell you why waiting lists have blown out. Because the prime minister of Australia is the cutter in chief. The cutter of health funding, the cutter of education funding, the cutter of penalty rates. The Australian people want fair dinkum plans for the future not cuts, cuts and cuts and not too little, too late. Thank you everybody.

ENDS

LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Good morning everyone and thanks for coming down to the Esplanade in beautiful Darwin Harbour. It’s a wonderful morning and we are particularly happy to have our leader Bill Shorten in town once again. Bill is a frequent visitor to Darwin and through the Territory in fact, more than any other Opposition Leader has ever visited the Territory, and that’ll continue should we form government. Very proud also to be here with my Parliamentary colleagues Catherine King, Shadow Minister for Health, Pat Dodson, Senator for WA, and really a powerhouse when it comes to Indigenous Affairs, First Nations Affairs in our country, and of course my Northern Territory colleagues, Warren Snowdon, the Member for Lingiari and the NT Senator Malarndirri McCarthy. So thanks for coming down. It’s great to have this attention in the Territory. The Northern Territory has always done better, will always do better in the future under Federal Labor. It’s great to have Bill in town and I’ll hand over to him shortly, but what I’m particularly proud of is that this package of support not only goes out and supports the health of First Nations people in the Northern Territory and around our country, but there’s also stuff in here for the health of people in my electorate. I’m proud to represent the people of Darwin and Palmerston. So we’ve got a great package, we’ve got some great announcements today. Thank you for coming down and I’ll hand over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Luke. Well, great to be back in Darwin again and the weather’s fantastic. The Territory’s a very exciting place but it deserves a government in Canberra who will get behind the aspirations and dreams of the people of the Territory. Today in particular, I’m really pleased to announce that a Labor Government, if elected, will invest $115 million to improve the health outcomes of our First Australians. We should be a country who ensures that our First Australians have the same health outcomes as other Australians. We want to Close the Gap. Now I understand that talking about Indigenous health mightn't change an election, but it can change the nation. This country has to be the best we can be in the way that we offer the same opportunities to all Australians. When First Australians have lesser health outcomes, then all of Australia is diminished. Our job as the Labor Party is to fight for all Australians and that's what we're doing today with $115 million in an exciting health package to assist Indigenous Australians. I'd now like to hand over to Catherine King to talk further about this important announcement.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much and it's terrific to be here in the Territory with Labor's united team. We have seen Scott Morrison cut over $16 million from our public hospital system here in the Northern Territory and he wants to cut another $69 million out of public hospitals for the Territory. Well Labor's united team wants to change that. We want to invest $92 million in infrastructure here in the Territory, and that will see a second Careflight helicopter, but also it will see $15 million invested in Darwin Hospital in mental health. There is only a 31-bed adult mental health unit for the Top End. That is it for mental health here in the Top End. We want to increase the number of adolescent mental health services as well as increasing the number of adult services. But we're also announcing today our $115 million package to help boost services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. Tackling rheumatic heart disease, a terrible disease that is entirely preventable in our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. We want to work on prevention. We know when we were last in government, when Warren was Indigenous Health Minister, what we saw was a decrease in the smoking rates across these communities. We want to turbocharge that again with the Deadly Choices campaign. This is a great package, in stark contrast to the huge cuts we've seen in public hospitals, in prevention and in dental under Scott Morrison.

SHORTEN: Any questions about this or other matters?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the member for Solomon said that there would be a support package for the NT. Will the Federal Government or a Federal Labor Government be bailing out the Northern Territory from their current financial crisis?

SHORTEN: Well whilst I'm not running for Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, especially as Michael Gunner is doing such a good job, gee the new Gunner Government was left with a lot of problems by the outgoing administration, the CLP-run people. You know, the CLP managed to do the double - the daily double. They managed to sell government assets, the assets of the people, the TIO, lease out the port for 99 years, so they got a whole lot of money in. So they sold assets that belonged to the people of the Territory and they still ran up massive debt and deficit. So the Gunner Government’s certainly got its work cut out for it. We will be announcing more details about further support for the Northern Territory. But if you want to talk about a Northern Territory package, Labor has already begun to outline our meaningful support in tourism, in roads, in health and education. Only Labor can be trusted nationally by the Territorians to make sure that you get a fair go.

JOURNALIST: Will that include GST top-ups?

SHORTEN: Well, what we'll do in our way is we’ll put more investment in the Territory. I get there's a legitimate concern to make sure that no one gets disadvantaged in GST, and it was Labor nationally, working with the McGowan Government in Western Australia, who ensured the West got their fair share. So our door will be open to talk to Western Australia, not about changing the GST formula, but making sure the Northern Territory gets its fair share of investment.

JOURNALIST: Will there be any cost to business under Labor's climate change plans?

SHORTEN: Our climate change plans will grow the economy, they'll create jobs and they'll lower power prices. I notice there's been a bit of a debate and a bit of a scare campaign by the News Limited papers talking about international offsets for carbon pollution reduction. And I thought this was something which both sides of politics had agreed on so I did a little bit of homework and I found this very interesting quote, which I think goes to the baseless, fraudulent scare campaign of the Morrison Government, backed up by their allies in some parts of the media. And it says, this quote says, "When it comes to helping the environment, it doesn't matter if you've reduced a tonne of CO2 here in Australia or in another country." I thought, well that makes sense. But I was surprised to find it was Josh Frydenberg who said that. So what we have is the government’s now scaring you about their own policies they used to have and support. When it comes to carbon pollution reduction, our strategy is the lowest cost abatement using a combination of international tools and domestic tools and might I also say plenty of incentives. Did you know that if we properly invest in renewables, there would be tens of thousands of new jobs? And did you know that if we don't take action, we're going to have a greater cost on our insurance on and arising from natural disasters.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten on the question of tax cuts, there's a report in newspapers this morning suggesting that Labor has taken a decision not to offer additional tax cuts for people on incomes between $90,000 and $120,000 or $125,000 a year. Can I – one – ask, can you confirm that Labor has taken that decision? And - two, if you can – what’s that say to people on those incomes? Doesn't it say, "You've got enough money and you're doing well"?

SHORTEN: Well, let's go through the whole position on tax and I'll be as brief as I can. But let's just state some facts. First of all, there's the first round of tax cuts proposed in the next term of government, whoever forms a government. Labor’s said that we have the same position. In fact we have a better position for 3.6 million people who earn less than $40,000. And in fact we've led the tax debate. In my Budget Reply speech of 2018, I proposed bigger, better, fairer tax cuts and the government then gradually, after a year of kicking and screaming, matched us. So on the first round of tax cuts, it's all the same except we're slightly better for people under $40,000. On the second and third round, they don't come in for a number of years and what we found when you study the fine print of the fraudulent claims of this government on tax is that they're promising people a tax rise on the never-never and they never explain upfront with how you pay for it. And let me, let me explain therefore how they pay for it - cuts, cuts, cuts. This government is addicted to cuts. We've had six years of cuts. You know, I never lose sight of the fact that current Prime Minister was the Treasurer for the last three years. He's the cutter-in-chief. Cutter-in-chief of schools, cutter-in-chief of hospitals, cutter-in-chief of services. How this government pays for these future tax cuts, which would require you to vote for the current government at least twice in two more elections, what it does is it requires billions of dollars of cuts. The Grattan Institute exposed this, called out the secret. The other thing is that let's look at the priorities of this government on their tax cuts. Did you know that there's $77 billion hidden away in the Budget to give tax cuts to the top three per cent of taxpayers? Or, put another way, in even more plain English, if you are a millionaire in Australia, you will get an $11,000 tax cut from the Morrison Government in 2024. If you are someone who earns $40,000 a year, you get $11 a week. For me, tax reform is about priorities. Yes, we would like to see more personal income tax reform, but what we won't do is sacrifice the schools, sacrifice the waiting lists, sacrifice the hospitals to make an unfunded promise, and this is the inherent lie of the government's position: they want to look after the top end of town by cutting services to everyone.

JOURNALIST: The Australian is suggesting that your carbon credits policy would cost Australians $25 billion. I take it it's a figure you reject. How much would it cost?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, it is just a nonsense claim. It is a nonsense claim and it is built upon the back of a big lie. It says somehow that using international offsets to help abate carbon is a bad thing. Well, if it's a bad thing, why don't go they to Josh Frydenberg, the current treasurer and say, you used to believe it didn't matter where you cut the carbon from so long as you were cutting the carbon. Well that's our view. In terms of the costs, we're relying on the same public modelling that the government has. But you know, these News Corp climate change deniers, and of course their ally, the Prime Minister - a coal-wielding, climate-denying cave-dweller on this issue - they all say, "Look at the cost," well they never mention the cost of the extreme weather events, do they? They never mention the cost of not getting into renewables and they never mention energy prices, do they? This is a government who every quarter used to rush out for the last few years and say energy prices are going down. Well that lie has been exposed. Energy prices are up 15 per cent because we don't have proper investment, because we don't have proper rules around energy. Hang on, I'll come to you. Just over here.

JOURNALIST: Thank you. Isn't this issue starting to get a bit away from you? Is it a bit glib to blame News Limited? Shouldn't you announce the costings, bring that forward, bring voters in on your plans?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, the issue of climate change has been getting away from Australia for the last ten years. The people of Australia are fed up with politics. We want to talk about what has been getting away-- why is this nation paralysed on climate change? It's because one half of the Liberal Party, the bully boys, bully the other half. The reality is, if the Liberals could be trusted on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. What's been getting away from Australians is the fact that energy prices are going up. We are having a technophobic debate where we're told to be afraid of new renewables technology and keep doubling down and investing in power plants that are 50 and 60 years old. This climate change debate for a decade has been dysfunctional and dishonest and divisive. It's about time we backed the science and we backed the people.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a rough figure at least on how much it would cost?

SHORTEN: Well, you keep going on cost. I want to say to you let's get this straight. What is the cost of taking no action? What is the cost of no action? I can tell you. Energy prices are up. When did this Government get a leave on its own appalling and abysmal track record on energy prices? Australians are angry. They're angry at a Government who can't work out taking real action on climate but want to push all the problems down the road and let our kids sort it out when they actually want action now, and Australians are angry at their power bills. Cost of living is the big issue. Cost of living and wages are the big issue in Australia. The middle class of Australia feel like forgotten Australia. They feel like that Bob Hawke had a view of Australia that looked after them, and they even thought John Howard had a view of Australia. The middle class are looking at this election, and they are saying to the government, "You're promising us nothing now, and you won't take action on climate change, you haven’t got a wages policy, all you want to do is cut, cut, cut." The big question, the big secret, is how does this government pay for its tax cuts on the never-never? Tax cuts which go disproportionately to the most well-off in our society? I will tell you how Mr Morrison pays for looking after the top end of town and the top three per cent of taxpayers - by making you, and every Australian, pay more for your health care and get less services in your hospitals and aged care.

JOURNALIST: A report in the paper today states the McKibbin report estimates that it would cost businesses $25 billion by 2030 to buy the foreign carbon credits. Can you say how much money you believe Australian businesses will have to pay to buy these carbon credits over the next decade? Is this the $25 billion figure accurate? Is it more? Is it less?

SHORTEN: The $25 billion dollar figure is just a lie. It’s using - you can make any number work for you if you pump in the assumptions you want to. It is using top-price EU carbon offset prices and then saying that's the only thing that will happen. That is so intellectually dishonest it does not even deserve to be talked about. What we are going to do is start looking at how we help industry meet the future. You know, the big missing link in this whole debate - it's as if the government never tried to do did climate change. Now they have tried and failed. What we are doing is we are using their industrial safeguards mechanism. We are using their National Energy Guarantee. What we are doing is going to work with our energy intensive trade-exposed sectors: cement, steel, aluminium and other sectors. We have created a $300 million dollar fund to help them invest in new technology. The reality is that once companies - and I've visited the factories and organised the workforce, I've seen the technology, I've sat in the boardrooms - every company who invests in lower carbon pollution creates more productivity and more efficiency and they invest in new technology.

JOURNALIST: $25 billion is a lie, Mr Shorten, you say, but isn't the problem here you don't have a number to put in its place? And as long as you don't have a number to put in its place, why should we be confident that you're taking the Australian economy somewhere where you know how it's going to be affected at the end of the line?

SHORTEN: Tim, you and I know this is a fundamentally dishonest debate. It’s not you or the people asking the questions - it is what the government's saying. It is so dishonest. You all recognise a scare campaign when you see one. I'll give you three numbers. 50,000 more jobs in renewables, if we go down our path. I'll give you another number - $18 billion dollars, the cost of natural disasters, but here I'll even give you a more modest number: When this government, when the current Prime Minister was the loyal Treasurer, of the previous Prime Minister - if you believe that I've got a bridge to sell you - but anyway, when the Prime Minister was the Treasurer, when the current Treasurer was the former Environment Minister and when Malcolm Turnbull was still on top, they said the National Energy Guarantee would deliver $550 in lower household prices on energy. The numbers we're using, are the numbers the experts are given, they're the publicly available numbers, and they're in some cases, Malcolm Turnbull's own numbers.

JOURNALIST: On Indigenous Affairs, Bill Shorten, Labor has said it will abolish the Community Development Program, and is campaigning hard on that issue here in the Territory. What is your new plan, and if you can't tell us today, will that be outlined before the election?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I can, and I'm also fortunate to have people of the calibre of Senator Dodson here and I might give him a run on the ball, but I'll just make this. The current CDP's not working. And if you don't believe me, just talk to the thousands of people in remote communities who rely on CDP. We have got a view that it needs to be reformed and we will reform it, but I might invite Pat to talk about some of the defects in the current scheme, and our thinking about going forward.

PATRICK DODSON, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS & ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS: Well look, if you're penalised for eight weeks, and you have no income, what do you think your kids do? They start to break in, they get into trouble, and you have a problem with kids on the streets, going hungry, and that's what this scheme does. It creates poverty, it creates discrimination, and is totally ineffective in getting any drive towards real work, real wages, and real employment. What we're about is going back to something like the old CDEP scheme. Where the community has a say, over the work, there's real wages, and if you work, you get paid, if you don't work you don't get paid, so the mutual obligation matter will be there, in relation to training, and for skilling up of people in these remote regions. And any of the savings will go back into these remote places, for improving the social opportunities as well as the entrepreneurial activities. So that people will be able to begin small businesses, look at creating opportunities for training, with a hub and spoke type of approach where we bring the skills into these communities, help train people up not only in the trades areas but in the service areas, so that we're keeping people on their communities, and keeping people in control of their own destinies. Rather than trying to extract them out of these places, plunk them on the fringes of some of these towns and where they end up, in the law courts, or in the prisons. So this is about going back to empowering First Nations peoples, giving them real control, and giving them some dignity. This government has totally ripped the guts out of Aboriginal people, it has totally treated Aboriginal people without any honour and any respect, and that's a big legacy we're going to have to turn around. And we start with the reform to the CDP.

JOURNALIST: The announcement you've made today, about ending and addressing youth suicide, and some of those other issues, isn't the core issue here, though making sure that people can participate in a real economy in some of these communities? And how is the Shorten Government going to change what's going on at the moment to ensure that can happen, and will some reform of the Land Rights Act be part of that?

DODSON: I'm not sure whether you heard what I just said. Because we are about creating the opportunity for people to be trained in their communities, looking for the opportunities to enter into entrepreneurial activities, bringing the skills that are required into those places and upgrade those skill bases. Reforms to the Land Rights Act I'm not sure in specifics what you're talking about, whether section 19 of leasing, the opportunities are there now, for many of these activities to take place. So these opportunities link to the broader agenda about northern development. And there's a whole lot of interest by First Nations peoples in participating in development, and in making sure that the future has got an economic underpinning to it, less dependency on the public sector outlays, and a clear retention of their rights to their land and preservation and protection of their culture. So these are not easy things to work through, but it's not as if there's a whole drive of people going out into remote Australia. It's appalling that people are living in poverty, people are living in unjust situations, and this government, this Morrison Government under Scullion and the rest of them, have caused First Nations people to have a totally hopeless kind of outlook on where we're going. We will turn that around under a Shorten Labor Government. With reform to the CDP, but also to other arrangements that we'll make, in terms of getting more authority back into the regions so people can have a say over the directions of their lives. Through Regional Assemblies, and giving people a sense that they have some capacity to determine how public policy affects them and the direction as to where they want to go.

JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts then, on the Northern Territory Government handing back the leases on 44 remote communities to the Coalition, then? And what would Labor do differently if they were in Government? Would they solve this housing stoush with the NT Government?

DODSON: Well I'm not sure whether that's happened. I think they've resolved that.

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY: No no, it's been resolved.

DODSON: It's been resolved. So in terms of that, I mean obviously, the capacity of the people who own the land, who are the First Nations people, they have got to have respect. And the way you deal with their land, is something you have to do in collaboration with them, and we'd be looking to work closely with First Nations people, through land councils and other entities, rather than just usurping their rights and imposing upon them processes and activities that are not in accord with what they want.

JOURNALIST: Ms King, can I ask you about chest pain clinics, if that's okay?

KING: Yeah, sure.

JOURNALIST: Would Labor support BDI or Baker IDI's call for rapid chest pain clinics to be rolled out, is that something you would support?

KING: Yeah, thanks, look I’ve only just sent the reports today and we'll have a detailed look at the proposal they're making, but obviously with our substantial investments in public hospitals, so that $2.8 billion better hospitals package, that will see, more outpatient appointments, more elective surgery, and more capacity for hospitals to innovate as well. So we'll have a look at the proposal but we've only just seen the detail today.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, regarding, on the-

SHORTEN: Just hang on, hang on, gentlemen, ladies, we've a fair go at this press conference, perhaps I'll allow one more question and then we got to finish up, we've got to go to Tiwi.

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten, regarding your claim that with your climate policies, we'd have GDP growth of 23 per cent in the 2020s, is that business as usual, the same as if you didn't have the climate plan, and where did you get the numbers from, I understand it's from the McKibbin report, but isn't that a bit outdated?
SHORTEN: Sorry what was the last bit of your question?

JOURNALIST: I understand that figure was from the McKibbin report, isn't that a bit outdated now?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, it's publicly available, now if we're saying, the campaign against climate change by this government is malicious and stupid. It's malicious because there are elements of this government, the right wing, who have undermined even people in the Liberal Party to take action on climate change, and whenever we talk about common sense on climate change, you just get a scare campaign run by the more extreme elements - just hang on- this is really important, cause climate change is an important issue in this election, and it's a malicious campaign by this government. What they want to do is scare Australians and say that it's too hard to take action on climate change, even though they ignore the fact that two million households have solar on their rooftops. It's also a stupid campaign. And this goes to costs. You know, the world is moving far more investment into energy generation from renewables, it is stupid to want to miss out on what the rest of the world is doing. It is stupid to say to people that you don't need to change. That nothing needs to change, and you can all have it all very good in the future without change. This is a malicious and stupid campaign. And when I hear people say, well the McKibbin report, those figures aren't right, well, you know what in climate change, there will never be enough figures to satisfy the climate sceptics. If you don't believe in the science of climate change, no amount of evidence will ever convince you, because fundamentally it's a stupid position not to take action. Thanks everybody.

ENDS

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody, I am really pleased to be back at this hospital. But I am even more pleased to be making an exciting announcement. If Labor is elected, we will provide $20 million to help with more clinical trials and make them available to people diagnosed with blood cancers and leukaemia. Leukaemia shouldn't be a death sentence. If you can't access a trial, then potentially the inability to access that trial becomes a death sentence. 6,700 of our fellow Australians will die this year due to blood cancers. This $20 million is so important to assist. I have a very good friend who passed a couple of years ago. I miss him. He died of leukaemia. For years he fought it. I don't want to see other people die when we could have prevented it. That's why this is such an important announcement. $20 million to help people in the fight of their lives get access to more treatment. This will save lives. I'll hand over to Catherine King to talk more about this great announcement and how we're going to help close the gap in health care between the west and the east.
 
CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks, and it's terrific to be here at Midland Hospital yet again with Bill, with Chris, with Hannah, with James, with Kim and with Madeleine, our fantastic Labor team over here in the west. Well, blood cancers are one of the second most diagnosed cancers and they include leukaemias, myeloma and lymphoma. They are a very significant burden on our health system but, more importantly, for patients who are diagnosed with these blood cancers, particularly if they don't get access to clinical trials after all other standard therapies haven't worked, it is really very much a death sentence. We've worked very closely with the Leukaemia Foundation on this $20 million program for improvement in access to clinical trials. The Leukaemia Foundation has worked with the Garvan Institute and this will mean that Australians who have exhausted all other options for access for treatment for leukaemia will get access to clinical trials through the Leukaemia Foundation's right to trial program. 47 people a day are diagnosed with blood cancers, 47 of our fellow Australians, and this will go a long way to improving their care. To also bridge the gap between the east and west in terms of health services today we've also announced further information about our cancer package. Two new radiation therapy centres in Geraldton, in Albany. Ten cancer nurses in prostate, lung, metastatic cancer across the community here in Western Australia, and Camp Quality in Kalgoorlie, a fantastic organisation, ensuring that children when they go home from an acute episode in hospitals back into their community are well looked after. We've also announced a further telestroke network, which we announced already. We even did the national announcement here in Western Australia but we've announced a further telestroke network for Geraldton today. Again, this is all part of Labor's commitment to Western Australia to really make sure we bridge that gap between the east and west when it comes to health care.
 
CHRIS BOWEN SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Bill. Of course, as well as today's important announcements, later on today we will see the pre-election fiscal outlook. Coming so close after the Budget you would expect it to confirm what we knew from the Budget. That is, that almost a quarter of the coming surplus is based on spending less on Australians with a disability. The Government says there's not enough demand, which is an insult to every Australian with a disability. We also know that it will confirm that to pay for their never-never tax cuts, the Government will have to engage in spending cuts of $40 billion a year over the medium term. $40 billion a year. Now, the Government wants to have lots of discussions about tax cuts. That's fine. We're happy to have that discussion. They're delivering tax cuts, which give a millionaire a tax cut of $40,000 a year and - sorry, give a millionaire a tax cut of somewhere around $11,000 a year and give somebody earning $40,000 a year a tax cut of $11 a week. That's their plan for Australia, but they'll also have to make deep cuts to pay for it. They will have to make deep cuts to health to education. If they want a debate about tax cuts, they've got to 'fess up what are the spending cuts to pay for it.  We know they've got form. They promised no cuts to health, education, pension, the SBS or ABC in 2013 and then they delivered all of the above, all of the above. Now, we'll deliver bigger tax cuts for Australians this year earning less than $48,000. We know that can be afforded, but we are not going to sign up for never-never tax cuts which will be paid for by cuts. Liberals cut. They cut health, they cut education and they've cut the pension when they've had the ability to do so. They should have the moral fortitude to 'fess up as to what the cuts are, then we'll have a proper Budget debate. So of course, the economy will be front and centre in this election. We relish that. We have alternative plans for the economy and for the budget and we invite the government to be truthful with the Australian people about what their cuts are.
 
KING: And I also forgot to mention that we've got Bill Petch from the Leukaemia Foundation who would like to say a little bit about our commitment of $20 million to improve the care for people with blood cancers. Bill.
 
BILL PETCH, CEO OF THE LEUKAEMIA FOUNDATION: The Leukaemia Foundation absolutely supports today’s announcement. It's a very significant step forward in creating access and equity of access to new and emerging therapies for people with blood cancer. These are therapies they wouldn't normally be able to get access to and be available to them. This is such an important step forward to survivability for people with blood cancer. It's the second most diagnosed cancer in this country and the second biggest cause of cancer death in this country. So when you fail standard treatments, clinical trials are really your only option. But, when one in five patients don't get access to clinical trials and less than 40 per cent of patients get access to genomic screening, that becomes a problem. So the right-to-trial program is an absolute life-saver for a whole lot of people and we're absolutely pleased to be able to support this initiative today. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Bill. Well said. Good morning, everyone. There's a lot of you and we're keen to have all the question we can do. I might just start on my left and work around and see if everyone can get a crack.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, yesterday when you said you had no intention of increasing taxes on superannuation, were you not including already proposed Labor policies of up to $34 billion worth of changes to the super savings? Were you just saying there wouldn't be any new ones, or did you forget that policy?
 
SHORTEN: Thanks for that. And I should also give a shout-out to James who asked the question yesterday. I thought I was being asked have we got any unannounced changes to superannuation and we've already made the announcements of the changes we're going to make. But obviously we have changes which we outlined three years ago, and of course I should have picked the words better, no question. We have no proposals other than what we've already announced previously. No changes to the general taxation treatment other than what we have announced recently. Just to remind people, we have said that we will lower the concessional contribution cap from $250,000 income to $200,000. We've also said that we will change the non-concessional contribution caps to $75,000, so we've made some announcements. But I also have to say I notice that the government has reverted to type with their, you know, lying about our policies. When you close down concessions and loopholes, this is not some massive increase in taxation. We're just saying we think these resources can be used better and of course when it comes to helping people contribute to their superannuation, we're not going to be lectured by a government who, with no mandate and no notice, changed the rules for amounts higher than $1.6 million. They made retrospective changes, which we opposed the retrospective nature of those changes. Also, we're not going to be lectured by a government who's frozen superannuation contributions, the compulsory contribution at 9.5 per cent. That's been such a disaster for low-paid people and middle-class people in this country. It's just real economic vandalism.
 
JOURNALIST: So, I'd like to clarify the compulsory employer contributions. Will you increase that? It is at 9 per cent currently, would you increase that? And what would you say to the Grattan Institute report that says that could hurt low-income Australians?
 
SHORTEN: The Grattan Institute have been very busy and we like to talk a bit about some of their reports, not just your one. On your specific answer it's at 9.5 per cent now and I'll ask Chris to supplement.
 
BOWEN: Yeah, thanks Bill. I'll answer that and add on the general issue as well. We'll get the superannuation guarantee to 12 per cent on the existing legislated timetable. That's the difference between us and the Government and the Liberals. The Liberals always find an excuse to delay increasing the superannuation guarantee. They promised in 1996 to keep the increases and they reneged on the promise. They promised to continue increases in 2013, they’ve reneged on the promise. And if you add up all those delays, an Australian today is now retiring with $100,000 less in their superannuation. So, that's what Liberals do. The superannuation guarantee increase is running about 23 years late and every day of  that delay is down to the Liberal Party. Every day of it. As Bill said, just on the broader issue, Scott Morrison seems to want a pat on the back for saying no changes to superannuation over the next three years. Well, that's what Tony Abbott said in 2013, and during that term, Scott Morrison, as treasurer, brought down a retrospective tax change. He said it wasn't retrospective. Well the giveaway was in the effective date - 2007 - which applied in 2016, the $1.6 million cap. So Scott Morrison wants to be very careful in his claims about superannuation. The other person who needs to be careful in his claims about superannuation is the Treasurer. The Treasurer has been very active in the last 24 hours looking at the Labor Party's website. He appears to have nothing better to do. Good luck to him. I've had a look at the Liberal Party website. The Liberal Party has got four election policies that have gone on the website. Congratulations. They've got four of them up. Well that's okay. They've got a Liberal plan on their website. The trouble is if you click on the plan, Safari could not open because the page is down. It's terrible when that happens, isn't it, Josh. The Liberal Party plan is not active on their website. Before they start casting aspersions around, they might want to get their house in order. Their Liberal Party website plan is broken, just like the plan itself. The website is down. The plan is not active. It has been wiped. So before Josh wants to get tweeting, maybe, just like your policies, get your policies right - get your website right, first as well.
 
JOURNALIST: Sorry, Chris. The Grattan Institute is warning that an increase to the compulsory super guarantee to employees would hurt low income workers.
 
BOWEN: Well, I make this point, we have low wages growth in Australia under this Government, and Bill is the only leader putting it on the agenda. Whether it be the living wage, whether it be reversing the penalty rate cuts, whether it be cracking down on sham contractors. Bill Shorten is the alternative prime minister putting wages on the agenda. Now on the superannuation guarantee, it actually may be one of the ways and is one of the ways we can actually improve the share of the economy going to workers over time. Putting the miracle of compound interest to work for them through superannuation. That's what the SG does. Now, some people will oppose superannuation increases, just like they opposed it being introduced, just like the Liberal Party opposed it being introduced in the first place and said that superannuation would be a disaster. It's one of Labor's great achievements. We're very proud of it, and only Labor will defend it. And the other point that I would make is that we have as well as the policies that Bill outlined, outlining policies to improve superannuation for women. It is not conscionable that so many women in Australia are retiring in Australia into poverty, having committed no crime but to work hard all their life. We want to pay the superannuation guarantee during paid parental leave, and we want to crack down on superannuation theft. That's what it is. Employers, some, bad employers stealing from their employees. We've all seen too much of it as local members. We know this is a big problem. The Liberals ignore it. We'll make superannuation a National Employment Standard, so they can be pursued through the courts, because employers who don't pay superannuation are stealing from the employees and they're also getting an unfair advantage over their competitors who are doing the right thing.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten you’ve referenced in your modelling which shows that your emissions target reduction would cost the same as the Government's. How will it cost the same as the Government’s, considering that you have a bigger target? How will it cost the same?
 
SHORTEN: Because we are costing our 45 per cent reduction with international offsets, so in fact, it does cost the same. The Government's 26 per cent doesn't have that. But further on climate change – we've given hundreds of talks about our policy on climate change, and we think it is an important issue in this election. So we can, you're referring, quite accurately to the McKibbin modelling but there are other costs which we should recognise. Inaction on climate change is going to cost Australians in the future. Just ask the Property Council, just ask the Insurance Council. Just look at the increase in extreme weather events, just look at the number of weather records broken on a constant basis. Did you know that our natural disasters cost us in 12 months, $18 billion. Now, we can't turn all of that around overnight with the policy, but we want to be a Government who hands on a better deal to our kids on climate change. The other cost of inaction is of course rising energy prices. Single biggest contributor to rising energy prices is a lack of a climate and energy policy in this country. The current Government is on to their 13th energy policy and their third Prime Minister. This isn't good enough. We're seeing a rise in prices because we're not creating policy certainty, because therefore the generation is not being invested in.
 
JOURNALIST: The question on superannuation yesterday was very clear. It's hard to believe that you misunderstood it. You could easily have specified that you only meant you would add no more policies on top of the ones already announced. Does it not look dishonest, like you’re trying to hide something when you don't mention that?
 
SHORTEN: Obviously, going back and reading it and rereading what James asked me, you're right. I was answering a question which I thought I'd been asked, and I accept that it was a different question asked. But you're all formidable journalists. You know that our policies have been out there for three years. I'm sure that you're probably all aware of them. And of course, today has been an opportunity to remind people of them.
 
JOURNALIST: You have an opportunity today to clear the record and be up-front with the Australian people about how much you will raise income taxes on superannuation.
 
SHORTEN: Well, I don't accept your characterisation that it’s raising taxes. When you wind back a concession that is stopping a tax expenditure which is not raising it. But let's be very clear - we're not going to take a lecture from the Government. Our policies are out there for people to see. But we're not going to take a lecture from the Government who retrospectively ambushed people with superannuation with their holdings by creating a retrospective timetable to pay more taxes. And also, one of great shames of this Government is that for the last number of years, mandatory minimum contributions have been stuck at 9.5 per cent.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you dispute the Government's figure of $34 billion over a decade?
 
SHORTEN: I'll get Chris to supplement this but I do dispute the characterisation as a tax increase. I absolutely do. What happens when you give a concession to someone is that's a tax expenditure. If I was to give you a concession on something, that is money that we take out of the tax system, which you get. That is a concession to you. And that, therefore, becomes a choice. Is it the best use of a concession to give someone a concession, preferential treatment on one aspect of superannuation, or to invest in other parts of our nation's priorities. I'll get Chris to answer.
 
BOWEN: Of course, Jim Chalmers and I will be releasing the budget bottom line and  impact of all our decisions very shortly. Now that we have the pre-election economic forecast we’ll be doing that over the course of the campaign. The Parliamentary Budget Office updates all our costings on a regular basis after every economic statement. But the superannuation tax concession reforms and winding into those reforms and reversal of some of the Government's measures, which our analysis shows are regressive, benefitting high income earners and high wealth individuals primarily, does return to the Budget $30 billion over the medium term on the current projections.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten opposed to superannuation taxation, income tax. The Government is going to the election with tax cuts aimed at people on $90,000 to $120,000 in 2022. They are not high income earners, if you live in Sydney, you live in Perth, that is not a high income. What do you say to those people that, under your present plan, you are not offering anything else?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, this Government's going with proposed tax cuts which means that you have to vote in at least two elections. By 2022, we think this Government is making up these tax cuts. Or in other words, they can't pay for them. The question which this Government hasn't yet answered is - how do they pay for these? See, once you take this tax income out of the budget, you’ve got to replace it. There's only two or three ways you do it. By raising more taxes somewhere else. By paying more interest on the national debt, which has doubled under the Liberals, or by cutting services. And this is why the Grattan Institute, who was quoted earlier in another matter, they’ve released a report that shows that this Government has got secret cuts that will involve tens of billions of dollars of cuts to services. So we think that these tax cuts that the Government are promising are a mirage. We certainly agree with the Government on the first round of tax cuts. In fact, we've got better tax cuts for 3.6 million people under $40,000. But this Government cannot explain its mirage of tax cuts in the future, on the never-never, unless they explain what they're going to cut in the way of services. And it's a matter of choices. I'm not going to make a promise about tax cuts which are a mirage which this Government hasn't explained how they pay for them. I think Australians want to see the detail and that's what we're doing with our plans and our proposals. I mean for example, for me the killer number which shows this Government's either radically out of touch or just lying to the people of Australia, is that under Mr Morrison's tax plan for Australians, if you're a millionaire, you'll get a tax cut under Mr Morrison of $11,000. But if you're a person on $40,000, Mr Morrison only wants to give you $11 a week. It just shows you his priorities and who he is backing in. And the only way he can pull off this stunt of giving millionaires $11,000 in tax refund and people on $40,000, $11 a week, is by taking the axe to health and education services. And as we've seen today, I just think that health is more important than giving a millionaire an $11,000 tax cut.
 
JOURNALIST: You ruled out any further changes to superannuation taxes.
 
SHORTEN: Let's be really clear, other than what we've already announced.
 
JOURNALIST: Other than what you've announced, yes. What about any changes to superannuation arrangements to stop accounts being eaten up by fees and exorbitant charges?
 
SHORTEN: I'll get Chris to answer that.
 
BOWEN: One of the important things, just to answer that as well, that Bill pioneered when he was Superannuation Minister was the concept of the Council of Superannuation Custodians, which we will implement in office. Which is to take superannuation out of the budget cycle, to have a transparent approach to the changes to superannuation every five years, which we have said, remains our approach in Government, and that was Bill's idea when we were in Government. It hasn't been implemented because we haven't been in office for six years, but it's a good idea. Because people are right to say that they want more certainty for superannuation and only Labor will deliver the Council of Superannuation Custodians. In relation to the other matters, fees and non-performing funds for example I would refer you to speeches that I've made and that Clare O'Neill is making I think as late as today, on Labor's general approach. To be fair to both the Government and the Opposition, we have both said that we'll take our time to work through the Productivity Commission review. We said we're not attracted to the best in show model, but it's a substantial report. I've said, for example, that no underperforming fund will have a friend in Bill Shorten or Chris Bowen, and I don't care if they're a retail fund or an industry fund. They'll have no friends in the Labor Government. They will need to lift their performance or get out. Now of course, we'll work through, with Treasury advice, the best ways of implementing that approach and of course, we want to put downward pressure on fees as we did when Bill and I were, respectively, Superannuation Ministers with MySuper and those reforms, and there's more to do. We’ve said that just a small reduction in fees over a working life massively changes somebody's retirement balance when they retire. And we remain committed to that, and I've said it before but it's so important to us, our reforms to women’s superannuation, and superannuation theft, are very, very high priorities for an incoming Labor Government.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, every day you say to Australians that everything is going up except the wages, the Grattan report says that the change to the super guarantee could keep wages down by 2 per cent. Are they wrong?
 
SHORTEN: The empirical evidence shows that, over time, when there's been an increase in compulsory superannuation it hasn't affected wages growth. So, I'm familiar with what they say, but I don't accept it based on previous evidence.
 
What I would also say about the more general point about wage stagnation in Australia is: it's a problem. No lesser person than the Governor of the Reserve Bank has said it's the number one issue, low wages growth. No political party serious to form a government can be taken seriously unless they have a wages policy. This Government does not have a wages policy, other than patting themselves on the back about low wages outcomes. I think the Finance Minister in one of his media appearances said the low wages is the architecture, is caused by the architecture that they've created in the economy.
 
This goes to what the heart of one of the big issues in this election. It is a referendum on wages.
 
Did you know that this Easter, because of the penalty rate cuts, all the people who will be serving us as we have our holiday time, the total of $80 million reduction in penalty rates. That's what the cost of these arbitrary cuts is. That is $80 million not just not going to low-paid workers, although that's a disaster, but that is $80 million less that low-paid workers have to spend in the economy. The fact of the matter is that if you earn $40,000 or $50,000, you don't tend to be investing it in your investment property or your Cayman Islands. You spend every dollar that you get. So when we shrink the volume of money in the economy, when we shrink and cut by $80 million, that's $80 million less that's spent in the economy.
 
Labor has got a plan to get wages going. Now, I know that the Government says that wage rises are bad, but they're actually not. The United Kingdom saw an increase in some of its minimum wages and it saw an increase in employment, not a decrease. What we want to have is modest but meaningful pay rises. We want to work with the independent umpire, the unions, the employers. I get that if a small business is worried about capacity to pay that that is a relevant thing to take into account. But I think ignoring wage stagnation is a disaster for the economy, because after all, as your opening question correctly said, everything is going up in Australia except your wages, and only Labor has a plan to get your wages moving.
 
JOURNALIST: With your climate change policy, what proportion of the emissions reduction will be required from the electricity sector?
 
SHORTEN: Well, we want to make sure that we're getting all of the sectors contributing to it. We’ve said that we want to see the electricity or the power generation industry contribute, do its bit to reduce by 45 per cent. We think it can do that. We believe, through our system, and I'm not too proud to say it,  we're borrowing from Mr Turnbull and the then-Treasurer Mr Morrison's National Energy Guarantee. We think that this is a good system  which can actually be made to work, and as we explained to an earlier question, using international offsets, we think it's sensible and considered.
 
Sorry, I’m just going to go over here. I promised Dan soon.
 
JOURNALIST: On wages, Mr Shorten, you'll be meeting with some more workers today, but I would like to find out what you are going to do to increase their wages beyond your policies of re-introducing penalty rates and cracking down on labour hire. How will you work to increase the wages of people who are not on the minimum wage?
 
SHORTEN: What we'll do is, the labour hire crackdown actually does help people above the minimum wage. One of the growing unfairnesses in Australian workplaces is you could be a diesel fitter at Volgren, which is the bus construction company, and you could have someone work alongside you- well, I won't use Volgren, because they might have a different arrangement for labour hire, but in many companies you’ve got someone who works directly for the employer and then they bring in someone else who has got the same trades qualifications and they work not for the employer but for a labour hire company who then contracts this person to the in-house company.
 
The problem then is that you have got two people working alongside each other and they are paid different hourly rates. What this does is this dampens wages growth, because what happens is if you can employ someone through labour hire cheaper than your direct labour, what you then do is say to your direct labour ‘I'd like to give you a pay rise but I can employ someone else from a labour hire company more cheaply’.
 
Another thing we are going to do to help people above the minimum wage is we're going to say in enterprise bargaining that at the end of a three-year enterprise agreement, the employer cannot arbitrarily terminate that agreement and say everyone is back to the award, which could be 50 or 60 or 100 per cent less than what they're getting now. Or the employer says you don't have to go back to the award but you do have to accept a significant wages cut.
 
Now, this is not a theory. What we've seen increasingly is right wing lawyers taking over industrial relations in this country, recommending to companies strategies to terminate agreements, force wages down. There have been hundreds of terminations each year. So, these are good, practical measures.
 
We'll have more to say about how we are going to help women get wage rises, too, and better deals, because what we often see in Australia is that an industry which is predominantly feminised - in other words, the vast bulk of people are women - what we see there is that on average their pay is less than an industry which is vastly populated by men. But I don't think that when you have got feminised industries the value of that work is actually any less. I think what it reflects is that for too long we've seen a gender unfairness, and that feminised industries, even though their work is important, like early childhood education – gee, that's an important job - because it's feminised, we think it’s been disadvantaged.
 
Sorry, Dan.
 
JOURNALIST: On Jane’s question, sorry, the cut in the electricity sector, will that be more than the 26 per cent cut in that sector that the Coalition is promising?
 
SHORTEN: No, our target is to reduce by 45 per cent-
 
JOURNALIST: -In the electricity sector?
 
That's our target. Our target is across 45 per cent for the electricity sector, yes.
 
JOURNALIST: Can I just confirm that-
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, I’ve just got a, Jono, good morning.
 
JOURNALIST: Good morning, Mr Shorten.
 
SHORTEN: Mr Lea.
 
JOURNALIST: You've had 23 hours to think about yesterday's answer. Can you give final detail on how much the emissions reduction target will impact the economy? What that figure will be? And you've talked about offsets. How much money do you expect or believe you need to spend on those international offsets to meet your target?
 
SHORTEN: We will see, across the 2020s, as a result of our energy policies and our climate policies, GDP growth of about 23 per cent. In terms of offsets, we allow companies to purchase offsets if they need to, if they can't meet their carbon emission reductions by changes in productivity in their workplaces.
 
JOURNALIST:  I'm not sure that's a financial figure, though, in just how much it's going to cost the economy, because BA Economics says it will cost $472 billion over the next 10 years? Do you disagree with that, and if so, how much is it going to cost?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I do disagree with that, and what we are happy to do is provide you with further information about international offsets. But I don't accept that the price of buying international offsets is anywhere in that dimension.
 
JOURNALIST: Is there a figure on how much it's going to cost the economy?
 
SHORTEN: I've said that I think - I don't think, I know - our economy is going to grow. I don't accept the characterisation that it is a cost. We're going to grow, and we're going to grow because we are going to move to a lower carbon pollution economy. And there's other aspects which means that we will grow. But the modelling has been done. McKibbin did his modelling: 45 per cent with international offsets, 26 per cent for government without.
 
JOURNALIST:  What if we don’t grow. There’s forecasts now that we're facing increasing headwinds, domestically and internationally. There's businesses out there which are concerned about facing a recession. What happens if we don't grow over the next five years?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all, what I would say, what contributes to challenges for the economy is this current government. The economy is more than just climate change.
 
What I would put to you is this: global debt is rising, and under this government, they have no plan to reduce debt. Global debt, about 10 years ago, about $US130 trillion, now it’s $US230 trillion around the world.
 
What we've been lucky, as a world economy, is that interest rates have remained low.
 
But this government has constructed a wafer thin forecast of a surplus next year by robbing the NDIS, by hiding the cuts they're going to make.
 
What we've done with our economic reforms, and this is the bigger story, is that we've been very upfront. We know that what we need to do in this country is properly fund our schools and hospitals; properly fund our TAFE and our childcare. What we also need to do is give relief to low- and middle-class taxpayers, and that's what we're doing in our first term, but we also need to improve our financial bottom line as a nation.
 
This government has put together a surplus to get through the next six weeks. We all know it's tied together with sticky tape and Band-aid and heroic projections about wages. If you want to make sure that we secure growth for the future, you vote Labor, because this government's growth plan relies upon low wages and big corporate profits, and it relies upon cutting services.
 
The beauty of our plan for growth is that fairness and decency are good economic guidelines. If we get wages moving again, tick, economic confidence. If we invest in the physical infrastructure of the nation, as we are doing in Perth with roads and METRONET, tick, more jobs, more productive infrastructure. If we invest in people, if we're going to give all of our three year olds the chance to go to kindergarten as Labor wants to do, international best practice, that means that they, over the long term, are going to get a much better learning process and education. And if I can just finish about how we secure growth, we’re going to keep Australians more healthy because we think that funding health is an important issue.
 
I know that there are some around who say, Labor only wants to talk about health, well we want to talk about lots of things, and we have been over the last six years as a united team. But I am not going to be deterred or stopped from prioritising healthcare in this election because a healthy Australia is a productive Australia.
 
[JOURNALIST OVERTALK]
 
SHORTEN: I agree with that comment, Dan. Thanks.
 
JOURNALIST: Can I take you to George Christensen, and a tip of the hat to Galloway here, as well: George Christensen, is it right that he used taxpayer funds for flights connecting to overseas?
 
SHORTEN: No, I don’t think so, but Chris has been having a look at this matter. I have been working on some other propositions today, so I will get him to supplement. But it is a test for Mr Morrison. Is it really right that someone takes 11 weeks off every year to go to the Philippines? They’re elected to represent locals, not people in another country.
 
CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks, Bill. There’s two issues here. Has George Christensen been doing his job representing the people of Dawson? I don’t see how he can. We’re all hard working members of Parliament, people who want to be members of Parliament. I would say the same of most Liberal and National MPs, despite our differences with them. They want to do the best for their communities, and they work hard. You cannot do that having spent, as I understand it, hundreds of days, 300 days, overseas. You just can’t do that. You have to be in the community, you have to be talking to ministers, you have to be representing the community. You can’t be an effective member of Parliament with that level of overseas travel.
 
Every member of Parliament needs a break. Liberal, Nationals, Labor, Greens, everybody needs a break occasionally. Nobody begrudges somebody taking some time off. This is beyond the pale. He is not the member for Dawson, he is the member for Manila South. And I don’t care what country he was in. That’s irrelevant. He wasn’t in Australia, he wasn’t in Mackay. He wasn’t representing his constituents.
 
On the issue of travel, obviously I don’t have access to his travel details, but based on what I have seen and read he has very, very serious questions to answer about the travel. It is not appropriate to use taxpayer-funded travel to connect to a private overseas flight. It’s not appropriate and it astounds me that Scott Morrison stands by and says that it is OK. This is a test of his leadership. It’s not just a test of George Christensen, it’s a test of Scott Morrison’s.
 
JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen, can I ask, I know-
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, I want to get, I don’t want to annoy Tim.
 
[CROSSTALK AND LAUGHTER]
 
SHORTEN: Alright, what’s your question, if there’s no mileage in me nice to you?
 
[CROSSTALK AND LAUGHTER]
 
SHORTEN: I was only joking. It’s ‘be kind to Tim’ day.
 
JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen, can I ask you, are you suggesting that the Liberals have scrubbed clean their website of information that would embarrass them, or is the webmaster there just having a bad day.
 
BOWEN: I don’t know what their excuse is but I think they should get their house in order. I mean, Josh Frydenberg, the Treasurer of the country, has got time to take to Twitter last night about the Labor Party’s website, which the national secretary advises us is being updated and all the policies will be put there, which hasn’t been the case in every other election, that all the policies are outlined on the website. As I pointed out to you before, Scott and Josh, congratulations, have got four policies on their website. The incumbent government of Australia: four policies. Well done! And their Liberal plan says “the link is dead”. Now I don’t know if it is because they are embarrassed by the lack of a plan - they’ve only got a plan for a scare campaign, that’s all they’ve got, they don’t have a plan for the country – or it’s a more reasonable, innocent excuse. Josh can explain the hypocrisy which is at the heart of his political operation. With due respect, it is not my job to describe what is happening with the webmaster of the Liberal Party of Australia, only to point out that the Treasurer is a hypocrite.
 
JOURNALIST: But you could release the pages that you have taken off the Labor website so we could look at them and see whether they have been excluded because of embarrassing mistakes.
 
BOWEN: They’ve been on the website. The national secretary advises us that some of them were taken down to be updated some time ago. They are being updated. They will be on the website, all our policies. Now obviously some of the policies we announced in 2016. This is the 2019 election. Those pages need to be updated and it will happen. Some of the conspiracy theories around - I mean we announced these policies, in 2015 or 2016. I made a major speech a couple of weeks ago announcing the start date of the negative gearing policy and going through the details again and outlining the plans in some detail, including the start date. You can accuse the Labor Party under Bill’s leadership of whatever you want; you can’t accuse us of not leading the policy debate and putting detailed policies out there very early for people to examine and to scrutinise. Since 2015, leading to the 2019 election, we have led the policy debate and we are proud of every one of those policies.
 
JOURNALIST: Can I just confirm with the emissions reduction target that you will release full costings that will answer Jonathon’s question before the election?
 
SHORTEN: Fair’s fair, I did answer it just before, but in terms of our climate policies, we are very clear about our directions. These matters have been modelled and the debate is not a new debate is it, Anthony? I was just reminded as I was listening to the discussion that the CSIRO and Melbourne University have said that if we don’t move to the Paris targets, which is what Labor is saying we should move to, but if we don’t move to it the CSIRO and the University of Melbourne say it is going to cost Australian families $14,000 per household. So there is a lot of information out there.
 
This nation needs to move forward on climate change. I’ve said that there are several key issues in this election. One is unity versus disunity. One is referendum on wages. One is who has got the best plan on health for all Australians. But another one is action on climate change. This is a real debate between the past and the future. The issue is this is a government who, if you vote for them on climate change, that’s the triumph of hope over experience. If they were fair dinkum on climate change Malcolm Turnbull would still be the leader.
 
JOURNALIST: In regards to Labor’s wages policy, the Fair Work Commission which sets the minimum wages was set up be a Labor Government. At the time, neither Labor nor yourself as Minister was complaining about decisions the Fair Work Commission was making. Can you explain what’s actually changed between now and then that we now have a problem in the decisions that they are making.
 
SHORTEN: It’s called wages stagnation. It’s called the deregulation of the labour market through legal tactics. The fact of the matter is that since 2016 corporate profits have gone up on average 39 per cent, wages 5 per cent. I’m going to repeat that, because that is a big issue. Under a Liberal Government it’s never been a better time to be a top end of town corporate profiteer but it’s never been a worse time to be a working Australian. Millions of our fellow Australians have had no wages movement. So what we have seen is the consequences of this government’s economic policies where they have had one plan for most of their life in government which is to give a tax cut to the big end of town. You know they did vote 26 times against a banking royal commission. And in the meantime we have seen penalty rates cut, we’ve seen the expansion of labour hire, casualisation, we’ve seen the greater use of the termination of existing wages agreements to coerce people into lower conditions. We’ve seen revelations of rampant wages theft. We’ve seen the over-reliance on fixed term contracts in health and education. I mean how hard is it being a young person in this country. You do your teachers qualification and you come out and you say you are doing everything the nation tells you to do and then you just get a series of rolling short-term contracts for years after years after years. So the problem is that under the Liberals you can’t trust them to get wages moving. But we will always consult. We will always make sure that the improvements are modest but meaningful. We’ll also take the advice of the economists, and we will listen to industry and business. Thanks everybody it has been a nice conference, see you all later today.

ENDS

HOST: Bill Shorten, welcome to Perth.

SHORTEN:Great to be on the show.

HOST: Firstly, tell us why you’re here today?

SHORTEN: We’re here to explain Labor’s great policies for this election. In particular, on this visit we’re talking about our exciting new ideas to improve health funding. At the top of the list is new money - $20 million – to help leukaemia patients when they’re in the battle for their life. Blood cancers, of which leukaemia is one, take a terrible toll amongst our fellow Australians. We want to encourage more cancer drug trials, so that people can have access to life-saving medicine.
HOST: We have been asking our listeners this morning, Mr Shorten, to text through questions for you. I’d like to read you this text from Tim. He says “I’m really worried as a small businessman I’ve watched my business go from 15 staff to five since the McGowan government came to power and our local Albany economy has gone into freefall. Things are only going to get worse under a new government obsessed with all things green. When are you going to explain how your climate change policies will impact the economy?”

SHORTEN: Well you would love to know what business Tim is in, he obviously is having some business difficulties already, but let me just say this on climate change. First of all, taking action on climate change is good for the economy. Lack of action on climate change has led to an increase in energy prices. We know that investing in renewables is going to lead to 70,000 extra jobs. Western Australia is well placed to be a climate change leader, and that will lead to cheaper energy. Some other good news for a small businessperson, without knowing the exact small business he’s in, we are going to back lower taxes for small business, so that it will go from 30 per cent down to 25 per cent. We are also going to increase the ability of him to invest in new productive technology. If it’s over $20,000 any small business will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off their tax. So, if you’re in food, and you buy a new fridge, you will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off whatever the cost on top of what you already claimed and that will help you with cash flow, and that is great.

HOST: People are looking at the hiccups and stumbles at a time like this when you are focusing on an upcoming election, and such was the case yesterday afternoon, where you were seen to not answer a question that was asked by a journalist, and we have another question from a listener from Owen, asking what are the costings for your renewables and greenhouse gas emission policies, you owe it to the people of Australia to be transparent on this.

SHORTEN: Well, you made a preamble to this question. I have answered questions on climate change many times, many times. But I understand that perhaps people don’t always look at your old interviews, and every interview is as if it is the first time you have ever spoken. But on the modelling, first of all, $18 billion is the cost of natural disasters around Australia, so there is a cost to not taking action. Power prices have gone up across Australia. That’s because we don’t have a national energy policy, while this government’s had thirteen different national energy policies. When there’s no certainty on energy policy, people don’t invest in new energy. In terms of our proposals, modelling by Warwick McKibbin has shown that our 45 per cent reduction, including international offsets, has the same economic impact as the Liberals’ 26 per cent, who are not having international offsets, so, there you go.

HOST: So the costs are the same?

SHORTEN: Yeah. I would pick a more positive number than costs. GDP growth is going to be 23 per cent across the course of the 2020s. These are straight answers.

HOST: I mean, the thing with these climate change policies, these policies take time. You know, natural disasters are not going to stop the moment a good policy is agreed to.

SHORTEN: I don’t think any of us that extreme weather events are getting less frequent, are they?

HOST: No, but it may take a century to recover from that situation.

SHORTEN: If you don’t start – you are quite right, and what sort of world are we passing on to the next generation? We know this government is paralysed on climate change, and if they weren’t, Malcolm Turnbull would still be the Prime Minister, wouldn’t he?

HOST: Vote Compass is the online tool that ABC is using during the election campaign to gauge Australians’ views on the policies, taking the personalities out of it. The number one issue here in Western Australia is not the environment, but the economy, and that is the concern, and that is where they don’t trust you.

SHORTEN: Well, I don’t accept that. First of all, the idea that the environment and the economy are two separate planets and separate solar systems is rubbish. I know that’s not what you’re saying, but some people think that they are two different worlds. The second thing is that good climate policy is good economic policy. The fact of the matter is, we should be an energy superpower, we have got more gas in the ground than just about anywhere else in the world. The fact of the matter is we are the sunniest and windiest continent, and yet we don’t benefit from that. The fact of the matter is, in Australia two million households now have solar on the roof top, and what we have got to do is get more battery systems in. You know, I think Australians are sick and tired of a debate that says the future is too hard. Look at all this carry on about electric vehicles. We’ve said that we would like to see a target of 50 per cent of new car sales in 12 years’ time should be electric vehicles. Now, that is not a big of a jump as it seems. We don’t make cars here anymore because this government did not do anything to save it. The reality is, the rest of the world is moving to produce more electric vehicles. Toyota is going to offer an electric model of all its vehicles from 2025 onwards. So it’s all about … the beauty of all of this is why shouldn’t Australian motorists have options? At the moment, all we get is the very expensive cars, but once we’ve got a government that is willing to put in charging stations so that people in the bush can use electric vehicles, why shouldn’t Australians get access to vehicles that are cheaper on petrol?

HOST: But electric cars actually cost more, at the moment.

SHORTEN: Well, sorry, no, it’s actually been shown that over time when you pay for less petrol, it actually costs less. But I agree, at the moment the models are expensive, but this isn’t all about what happens next week and it’s not all about trying to take someone’s ute off them. We have got to have a political debate in this country which is not about scaring everyone, but says “this is what the future looks like”. What good is a government to Australians if it says that we are not going to plan for the future, we have no idea what’s coming down the road, we are not interested in international trends. This is the equivalent of a government arguing in favour of black and white television rather than colour, or AM over FM, although I like AM too.

HOST: (laughs) Not seeing what’s coming down over the road is quite an amazing analogy because I don’t think even you could have realised that electric cars were going to be the hot spot that it is. But the hot button issue –

SHORTEN: I just didn’t realise that we had a technophobic government who is afraid of new technology.

HOST: Every time we talk about it, we get loads of people talking about it, for and against.

SHORTEN: For and against. I guess my point is this: if you want to keep driving a petrol car, you can. Excellent. We’re not mandating anything.

HOST: But you would rather they didn’t.

SHORTEN: No, I’m happy if you do. What car you choose to drive is your business. It’s not my business. My job as a potential Prime Minister of Australia is to make sure that you have got the choices and the options and that we are not ignoring what is happening in the rest of the world. What if you had a doctor that said there might be new medicines or new treatments overseas “Oh no no, that is not the way we have ever done it in Australia, we can’t access that.” We can’t be anti the future. What we have to do is make sure that the future doesn’t leave people behind.

HOST: Bill Shorten is our guest, I beg your pardon, on ABC Radio Perth and WA, the Leader of the Opposition. Let’s go back to questions from our listeners.

Barry would like to ask you, your campaign is based on fairness, what is fair about taking away franking credits from retirees who have worked all of their lives paying taxes? Another hot-button issue on this program.

SHORTEN: Well, let’s go back to this. When you give a tax credit to someone who is not paying income tax, that is a gift. Now, it’s not immoral – I don’t blame Barry for taking the gift – I don’t blame him at all, it’s not illegal. But how can you give a tax refund to someone who hasn't paid income tax? It is a gift and the problem is that this gift when John Howard introduced it in 2001 was costing half a billion dollars to the Budget. Now it is costing nearly $6 billion. When will we decide that this gift is too big? When will we decide that it's not correct that we should be giving a gift rather than funding our schools and aged care? It’s a matter of choices.

HOST: A lot of people make the point that $3000 or $2500 is what pays for their health insurance every year, they make arrangements years in advance based on what you call a gift so why don't you grandfather these arrangements?

SHORTEN: Because it is costing $6 billion. The reality is that when you go to hospital it costs a lot more than $2000, I need to find money for our ageing population. Did you know 411,000 Australians, nearly heading towards 420,000 in the next year or so, are going to be diagnosed as living with dementia? That is expensive. We have schools, we have childcare going up in cost, energy prices have gone up. Did you know everything in Australia is going up except wages? So I am not saying it is illegal or immoral. We are saying that anyone who is on a pension or a part pension is exempt from the change, but there is no principle of tax law since the ancient Romans, no textbook ever has said you should get a tax refund when you haven't paid tax.

HOST: Bill Shorten there are a number of tightly held seats in Western Australia that you're fighting over at the moment. There are some that you would give up on and one of them would be Curtin but you did play a surprise hand I guess when came to delivering a candidate to Curtin for the ALP, and with it looked like the aim of disruption I guess, Melissa Parke, I am talking about and she of course now has stood down as the candidate for the ALP for the seat of Curtin over, some people would say, embarrassing comments that she made claiming that a Palestinian woman was forced to drink bleach at the Israeli border. How do you feel about the remarks and your decision to endorse her in the first place?

SHORTEN: Well I like Melissa. I think she is an accomplished woman and she was a good Member of Parliament when she was there and she's also worked overseas for the United Nations and refugees so, I like her. In terms of her candidacy, she thought it would be good to run and then she made a decision that she didn't want to become a distraction and of her own volition she decided to take a step back again

HOST: So you didn't ask her to stand down?

SHORTEN: No. And the point about it is that she is a strong person. Anyone that knows Melissa knows she makes her own decisions. Having said that, in terms of what she has actually said I wasn't there. I am not saying she is wrong, I am not saying she is right.

HOST: Are you embarrassed by it?

SHORTEN: No, she has strong views. I like Melissa. It didn't work out on this occasion. But I am not one of those people that is going to … I like my team and I think that politics is better suited when you say positive things rather than everyone piles in.

HOST: And now Josh Wilson supports a two-state solution in Israel and that is also causing you some tension?

SHORTEN: No, he supports party policy and that is our party policy, a two-state solution - the right of Israel to exist behind secure borders but also recognising the legitimate aspirations of Palestinian people to their own country.

HOST: Bill Shorten, will any elected WA Labor members make their way onto a Government front bench if you win?
 
SHORTEN: Who gets on the front bench is ultimately decided by the Caucus. But I think all things being equal that would be the case, yes.

HOST: Pat Dodson?

SHORTEN: Well I have to let the Caucus members have a say, I don't run a top-down organisation, but I think personally Pat Dodson is an outstanding Australian, an outstanding West Australian. I personally approached him to run for the Senate and you know any room that he is in everyone else in the room always feel a bit better because he is such a significant father of reconciliation.

HOST: We have watched the Budget and your reply very, very closely. Why is the Newstart allowance, an increase, not an ALP commitment?

SHORTEN: Well we are going to review it. First things first - I do think Newstart is too low. And the Government, they’re not going to do anything about it. What we want to do is review it, we want to see the interaction with the other benefits which people get, the tax and transfer system. But we are not reviewing it to lower it.

HOST: Would you look at changing it so that it, the annual indexation is similar to what happens with the pension?
 
SHORTEN: I will let the review look at all of those issues, that is a legitimate issue. I think that some conservatives say that you should only be temporarily unemployed therefore keep it low and that way it gives incentive for people to get off it, but I don't think keeping it so low actually achieves anything other than is unfair to people very down on their luck.

HOST: It makes a lot of people very sad...

SHORTEN: We are up for reviewing it and we want to review it positively.

HOST: Substantially, I mean I know you can't commit but it needs a good hike...

SHORTEN: We get into the adjectives game, what I can say is it is too low.
 
HOST: Who do you imagine is on Newstart when you picture it in your mind's eye?

SHORTEN: I think it is a range, I don't think it's one stereotype at all. You get people who are older who, the factory closes, they are thrown all of a sudden on the scrap heap and told they are not worth something. You could have young people. Youth unemployment is pretty significant in parts of Australia and of course unemployment in the west is a challenge.

HOST: We've been asking our listeners over the last couple of weeks about trust in regard to politicians and in particular who they trust more, you or Scott Morrison. 22 per cent of our listeners who took part in our survey said they didn't trust either of you. Do you accept that voters are switching off?

SHORTEN: I think there is disillusionment with institutions generally. I don't think a lot of people trust the media. Now I do think they trust the ABC that is why, for example, we have committed to an independent public broadcaster. But I think institutions generally including politicians are viewed sceptically, that there is this view that we are all just in it to look after ourselves and not the people. I'd have to say to people who get frustrated, we've decided to go first, we've got to trust the Australian people. We have put our policies out there. Now the very fact that we are having such a conversation, we are looking to the future on climate change, or we are focused on better health care not bigger tax loopholes, the fact that we are looking at unsustainable tax concessions, and saying can this nation keep going down this road of intergenerational unfairness where you look after people at one end and everyone else is not looked after. So we are taking the first step to rebuild trust by putting our policies out there. In politics traditionally, the argument goes when you are the opposition be a small target, let the Government fall over. Now this Government is hopelessly divided. Anyone who thinks they're going to unite after the election has no idea of the deep level of hate within this Government and dysfunction and chaos. But having said that we have to rebuild trust and that is why we're putting our policies out there. That is why for instance I have been to Western Australia for 80 days as opposition leader. I do what I call Town Hall meetings. We invite a whole suburb. Doesn't matter your politics, doesn't matter if you want to protest, doesn't matter if you have a grievance at the system or individuals we invite you to come along. I know that anyone that has been to our Town Halls likes what they hear. What I have got to do perhaps is have this longer form discussion than little gotcha conversations at eight seconds at a press conference which doesn't really add much to the sum of human knowledge does it?

HOST: Bill Shorten just a final question for you talking about town halls, we read today that you have agreed with the Prime Minister Scott Morrison to a debate here in Perth on the April 29. Can you tell us what the arrangement of that is. Will it be a town hall-style debate? Will it be a more formal debate? Will there be questions from the audience or limited journos?

SHORTEN: My preference is questions from the audience, just direct. The media, of course, should be invited, they can film the interplay. My view is that the more that I can talk directly to the people the better our case goes.

HOST: Thank you very much for your time.

SHORTEN: Lovely thank you very much for your interest.

ENDS

NADIA CLANCY: I’m Nadia Clancy, I’m Labor’s candidate for the federal seat of Boothby and I’m really happy to have Bill Shorten, Catherine King and our Labor senate candidate Emily Gore here today in my electorate – well my hopeful future electorate. I’m really proud of Labor’s positive policies for our future, and particularly our health announcements over the last couple of weeks have been incredible. And we have some more today. And it’s so easy to go doorknocking and meet with people in our community because we have such an exciting message to give people, and even just on Saturday I doorknocked a young woman who has blood cancer and is on the disability support pension. And she’s really, really struggling; she’s not just worried about her health, she’s worried about how she can afford to get the tests she needs to get throughout this process as she’s desperately trying to fight this cancer. And she should be focusing on fighting for her life, not worrying about how much cash she has in her wallet. And so I’m really, really excited that we have more really great announcements today in the health space, even one specifically for Flinders University.
 
BILL SHORTEN: Thanks Nadia. Good afternoon everybody, it’s great to be here in South Australia in the seat of Boothby with our very capable candidate Nadia Clancy. Today Catherine and I are pleased to announce a significant new investment in pathology testing in Australia. We accept the argument that Australian pathologists have put to us that the system is near breaking in terms of bulk billing. That without a significant injection of new funds, that we could be jeopardising the wide take up of bulk billing for pathology tests. Now one of the great things about our healthcare system in Australia, is that when a doctor prescribes a blood test they can do so knowing that they’re not putting financial pressure on our patients, that the system can afford the tests which patients need to help with the treatment that they require. But at the moment in Australia, it's estimated by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, that in fact 140,000 of our fellow Australians is currently not taking pathology tests because of the cost. Our system of bulk billing should not be jeopardised because of under-investment in pathology. We need these tests when people are in the fight of their lives. So Labor will invest $200 million so that we can keep the high rates of bulk billing and pathology where they are. I’d now like to invite Catherine to talk a bit further and then we'll be happy to take questions.
 
CATHERINE KING: Thanks Bill, and it's terrific to be here with Nadia Clancy, our candidate for Boothby and also Emily Gore, our Senate candidate here in South Australia. Well Bill and I are announcing a further part of Labor's $2.3 billion cancer plan today. And we know that pathology is vitally important for cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment. 100 per cent of all cancers being diagnosed rely on pathology. It is a vital part of our healthcare system. Since Labor was last in office, we introduced bulk billing incentives to make sure we could keep the weight of bulk billing for pathology and keep free pathology for people across the country as high as it possibly could be. But since the Morrison Government has been in place, six long years of a freeze on the Medicare rebate, pathology is under pressure. We had to fight them over the course of the last few years because they wanted to get rid of the bulk billing incentives and we were successful in doing so. And today we’ve responded to Australian Pathology telling us that because of the long freeze in the indexation of rebates for pathology, that pathology bulk billing is under pressure. This $200 million today will help support 3.2 million patients every year accessing pathology tests across the country. Cancer patients and older Australians who predominantly are highly represented in our cancer statistics. This will mean that pathology stays free for many, many Australians and that we support bulk billing. We're also going to be announcing today $2.5 million here at Flinders University Medical Centre, a really important facility that works so closely with the hospital here as part of our education precinct in South Australia, for a $2.5 million clinical simulation lab. Simulation labs allow our doctors in training, our nurses in training, our other clinicians in training to actually have almost live experiences of significant crisis that can occur in our hospital system. And it means that the quality of care that they provide while they're doing that training constantly will be significantly improved. We're very proud of that $2.5 million investment and I want to thank Nadia for her advocacy here. I’m going to hand over to Eric, who is from Australian Pathology, to talk a little bit about the importance of Labor's $200 million commitment for pathology bulk billing today.
 
ERIC SWAYN: Good afternoon. My name’s Eric Swayn, I'm representing Australian Pathology. I’ve worked in this industry now for just over 20 years, and to hear the news today from ALP about their significant investment in pathology tests is something that is greatly welcomed by our industry. Australians may not know this, but every blood test, swab, or biopsy that is done is actually touched by a pathologist. It’s also worth noting that 100 per cent of cancers are diagnosed by pathologists in our laboratories. So this announcement for cancer sufferers and older Australians is welcome to protect those that are most vulnerable. This investment of $200 million into bulk billing will protect the older Australians and those suffering from various cancers. It will enable no out of pocket costs for the diagnosis and testing required for cancer treatment. Thank you, Mr Shorten.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you very much. Welcome words from the peak association representing pathology in Australia. Are there questions?
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, this morning you were with asked about the Sharrouf children being brought back. What possible reason is there for not bringing them back to their family in Australia?
 
SHORTEN: None that I can think of. Just on the Sharrouf children, they shouldn't be a political football. They have already suffered. Incredibly irresponsibly, their parents took them to a war zone. Their parents took them into a regime of terrorism. But these children shouldn't be held responsible for what their parents did.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, significant parts of your negative gearing policy have been taken down from Labor’s website, charts and graphics explaining how the policies will work. Can you explain why that’s happened?

SHORTEN: Yes. We're updating the documents. I mean let's face it, if you want to talk about putting policies upfront, we're doing that. We put our negative gearing policy out from the Sydney Town Hall in about February, March, of 2016. As new numbers come to light, we update them. So, I think if you want to look at the gold standard in terms of putting policies out there, I don't think any of you can really look past Labor. But if you want to look at what is not the gold standard, have a look at this very important report the Grattan Institute has written today. I would encourage you all to read it. It has some real information there. What it shows is the Liberals' economic model on display yet again. It shows that for tax cuts on the never-never, they are planning though to cut up to $40 billion a year in secret cuts. The Government will have to answer during the course of this campaign. What are the secret cuts you're planning to promise an illusory tax increase in half a decade’s time?

JOURNALIST: Do you, and if you do, why do you believe that Australian taxpayer money should go towards helping restore Notre Dame?
SHORTEN: Restore?

JOURNALIST: Notre Dame, in Paris.

SHROTEN: Oh listen, I think all of us were shocked to see that image. Notre Dame is a global icon. I don't know how many people here, but certainly I and millions of Australians over the years have backpacked or travelled to Paris, and one of those postcard moments of any young Australian's trip overseas is to go to Notre Dame. Notre Dame’s an 800-year-old cathedral. It has survived civil war and religious strife, German occupation. So I think a lot of us were really sad and shocked to see what has happened today. I mean for Australians, imagine if we saw the Opera House on fire. And that is essentially what we have seen in France. And Notre Dame therefore doesn’t just belong to Paris or France, it belongs to the world. I like Mr Turnbull's idea that there should be some modest commitment to help rebuild, if that is the case, and that’s what friends are for. And I would encourage Mr Morrison to take up mine and Mr Turnbull's idea.

JOURNALIST: Should Australian special forces be used to get the Sharrouf children and other Australian children out of Syria?

SHORTEN: I’m not going to start giving security advice, I’ll leave that to the security agencies.

JOURNALIST: In regards to your living wage policy, can you clarify who the 1.2 million workers you promised a pay rise are? Where did you get this figure from and can you explain who exactly it is, given that 180,000 workers are on the adult minimum wage?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, you’ll find that about well over a million people are award-dependent. And so they're the people I'm talking about. If you improve the living wage, if you improve the minimum wage to a living wage, then we want to eventually see that flow through to the people who are still reliant on the award system. That number’s bigger than 100,000 people. But let’s, you know I get where the question’s coming from, and it's really about this ongoing boast that Mr Morrison keeps saying about a strong economy. Let's unpack what a Liberal strong economy is based upon. It's based upon two principles. The first is keep wages as low as possible, and they're proud of that, and keep making sure that the profits go up and up. This Government has an almost religious conviction that if you can make the richest people in Australia richer, the richest companies in Australia richer, then eventually some of the crumbs will fall off the table. So that's the first leg of the principles of Mr Morrison's strong economy, keep wages down. The second leg though, and the Grattan Institute’s blown the whistle on this again today, is that the number two method that this Government believes keeps a strong economy, is by reducing real spending on essential services that working Australians require. TAFE, universities, child care, health care. These are the services which working Australians and Australians depend upon. If that’s what Mr Morrison calls a strong economy – low wages and reduction in real services – then that's not the strong economy Australia needs. Labor, by contrast, believes in a strong economy built upon fairness and decency. And we are not going to stand by and watch Mr Morrison boast about a strategy which sees the rich get richer, and everyone else just miss out. Where the cost of living is squeezing millions of wage earners.

JOURNALIST: Have you or any of our colleagues spoken to Sam Dastyari about today's pathology announcement?

SHORTEN: I haven't. And indeed, this pathology announcement stands on its own two feet, doesn’t it? When you think about it, and I will get Catherine to supplement the answer, pathology makes sick people well. It has that potential. When you're in the fight of your life, you know, 100 per cent of cancer needs pathology. So I understand if perhaps the Government doesn't like the fact that we're leading on health care as we do, but the experts tell us there is a problem, that that bulk billing levels of pathology are under pressure. As I said earlier, but I think it's a pretty fair point, one of the great strengths of our medical system, is that doctors can recommend tests and they’re very confident that it’s not going to put added financial pressure on patients. I want to preserve that system but the problem is, and Catherine can talk at more length, 140,000 Australians now annually are recorded as not being, taking their pathology tests because they can't afford to. But I might hand over to Catherine for a moment.

JOURNALIST: But can I bring you back to the question?

SHORTEN: Yeah, but I’ll let Catherine talk more about her announcement first.

JOURNALIST: You haven’t answered whether your colleagues have spoken to him.

KING: Thanks very much. The answer to that is no from me. But certainly, in terms of pathology – what we know has been happening since Labor was last in office, we introduced bulk billing incentives because we know how critical it is for people to get those tests if they’re going to actually find out what is going on with their health. Whether it be from cancer diagnosis, diabetes, other really important chronic diseases that we have in our community – pathology is absolutely vital to that. What the Liberals tried to do, what they tried to do in their Mid-Year Economic Financial Statement in 2015, was actually get rid of those bulk billing incentives, cut $600 million out of diagnostic imaging and pathology, and they faced a complete pushback because what that would have meant, is that Australians across the country, would have seen, starting to have to pay co-payments for pathology. What we're doing today is making sure that bulk billing for pathology stays high, and that’ll benefit over 3.2 million Australians across the country every single year, as they get tests for cancer, and older Australians for tests for a whole range of other diseases.

(JOURNALISTS ASKING QUESTIONS)

SHORTEN: Sorry, I will come to you, Jade.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten there's been allegations that that Liberal Party's candidate in Chisholm made homophobic comments. Does she need to apologise and does the Prime Minister need to intervene?

SHORTEN: Well I think it will be very interesting to see how Mr Morrison handles this rogue candidate in Chisholm. It’ll be very interesting indeed to see how he handles it because he needs to make up his mind on a couple of questions. One, whether he wants as a candidate for the Liberal Party someone who’s said such hurtful things about her fellow Australians, and two, whether he wants as a candidate for the Liberal Party someone who stood in front of the media and said it didn't happen when clearly it did. This will be a test for him to see how he handles it in coming days.

JOURNALIST: Can you rule out no new or increased taxes on superannuation?
 
SHORTEN: We have no plans to increase taxes on superannuation.
 
JOURNALIST: That’s different from ruling it out though.
 
SHORTEN: We have no plans to introduce any new taxes on superannuation.
 
JOURNALIST: So will you rule it out?
 
SHORTEN: Sure.
 
JOURNALIST: You have spoken almost exclusively since your budget in reply speech and focused on health. When can voters learn more about Labor's emission reduction target, how you will get there and the cost to the economy?
 
SHORTEN: First of all I haven’t spoken exclusively about health.
 
JOURNALIST: Some of your staffers have said the same in private conversations.
 
SHORTEN: I don't know what private conversations you have with people or what you want to reveal. But let me go to the record – I just said four minutes ago Mr Morrison loves to boast about his strong economy. I'm pretty sure we were all here when I said that. But let me say it again, because it's a good point to make. Mr Morrison loves to boast about his strong economy. But his strong economy is your classic Liberal strong economy, it's built upon two propositions, one, low wages, they're proud of it. They almost have a religious fervour, don't they, about being happy when the wages are low and corporate profits are up. Did you know that since the last election, corporate profits have gone up 39 per cent? But in fact wages have moved on average 5 per cent. And the second leg that he relies upon for this Liberal strong economy is the reduction, the reduction in real spending on services. In particular, health, but also I mentioned education, I mentioned TAFE. I mentioned childcare. The problem for Australia is that a Liberal strong economy relies on the mythical belief that if the biggest corporations in Australia make a lot of money, if the richest people in Australia can pay less tax through the loopholes, that miraculously everyone else benefits. That hasn't been the lived experience. Labor has a different view about what creates a strong economy. What creates a strong economy is fairness and decency.
 
JOURNALIST: You didn't answer the question. Answer the question, when can people know, Mr Shorten, the cost to the economy. You didn't answer the question. You should answer the question. That's why we're here to ask questions, why can't you answer the question?
 
SHORTEN: I'm going to give your colleagues half a go.
 
JOURNALIST: Why won't you answer the question, Mr Shorten?
 
SHORTEN: Dan, I'm going to go to you.
 
JOURNALIST: On pathology, nine out of 10 pathology blood tests are done out of hospitals. 99 per cent of those are bulk billed. How can you say the system’s at breaking point when the rate is at 99 per cent? And can you guarantee this $200 million will not just fill the bottom lines of pathology companies?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I’ll just refer to you the Institute of Health and Welfare saying that 140,000 of our fellow Australians already are delaying or not having pathology tests because of the costs. But I might get Catherine to talk about how this is an important addition to protecting and preserving our existing system.
 
KING: We know that it will because pathologists are telling us that, they're telling us because of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government freeze on Medicare rebates, that has had an impact on pathology, that they are at breaking point. We knew, when we're in government, that we wanted to keep bulk billing, it's why we introduced bulk billing incentives, and then this government tried to get rid of them. We know, that this, this will be a new Medicare item that we work with pathologists on, again, that they only get if it is bulk billed, that that will preserve the rates of bulk billing for pathology. It's too important for us not to. We know that 100 percent of cancers rely on pathology for diagnosis, as are many, many other diseases, and this ensures that we are absolutely keeping the bulk billing rate high for pathology, which is too important for us not to do.
 
JOURNALIST: Surely pathology companies come to you and say we want more money, do you just roll over and accept that argument without scrutiny, and is that  the process that applies to other industries as well?
 
KING: Not at all. We work very closely obviously, we listen to industry, we listen to patient groups across the country, we listen to cancer groups across the country, and I've been the shadow minister for some six years now, I'm pretty experienced in what's actually happening across the health care sector. I know that bulk billing for pathology will come under pressure, and is under pressure, 140,000 Australians already not actually getting access to pathology tests because they can't afford it. It is always, always difficult in this area, but it is going to be even more difficult, if we don't actually undo the damage this Government has done because of its long freeze on Medicare rebates.
 
JOURNALIST: But hasn't the government done a better job? It was 97 per cent in 2013, when you guys left office, and it's above 99 per cent now?
 
KING: Again, the bulk billing incentives that Labor introduced are working. And this is a Government that tried to get rid of them, tried to cut them. If you remember the 2016 election campaign, 600,000 people signed a petition against Turnbull's cuts to pathology. We stopped them, we stopped them doing that, and that's why it remains high today, and why only Labor can make sure it will stay high.
 
JOURNALIST: If it remains high today, how can you say it's at breaking point?
 
KING: Again, listen to the pathologists.
 
JOURNALIST: Could I ask on those 90 excluded pages re your capital gains and negative gearing changes, you say there are new assumptions, so they need updating, which is a very fine thing. How do the assumptions change the costings on those two programs, and assuming that they're not affected, would you release the 90 pages so we can have a look?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I think the original question comes from a story I read in the Fin by Nicholas Lenaghan, and then it was followed up by a question here. We've said, and I went and checked when I saw the story, said how come this page is down, they said they're updating it. I can't add any more at this point.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten in Boothby do you support the South Australian government's plans for the Repat general hospital, and if so will you match the $35 million in Coalition funding pledged?
 
SHORTEN: Yes, we will. Do you want a little more detail than yes?
 
JOURNALIST: Yes please.
 
KING: I'm going to say yes too. In fact overnight I have actually been emailed by someone who, in the community, who operates out of there, saying the Repat will be really important, particularly for elective surgery. We'll match that commitment and we'll have more to say about our capital plans across South Australia to improve public hospitals across this community.
 
JOURNALIST: The health minister here says they haven't heard from Labor at all on this issue.
 
KING: We actually wrote, I can tell you now, I actually wrote to the health minister and he replied to me, and did not even mention Repat as one of the things he wanted Labor to put capital into. So I wrote to that health minister over two months ago now, and the Repat wasn't even mentioned. We know it's important to this community, we know it's important to Boothby. Nadia has made sure I know it is important to Boothby and we will fund it.
 
SHORTEN: I will just keep moving around. Jade, did you want to ask a question?
 
JOURNALIST: In terms of the Sharrouf children, is there anything more the Government should be doing there, and if they do come home are there particular measures that you would like to see in place to make sure they're not some kind of threat?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I don’t want to second guess the Government on this. These kids should not be a political football. Obviously the grandmother has worked very hard to try and see these children's welfare is put back up the top of the charts. But I'm not going to engage in criticism of the Government when I'm unaware of exactly what they have done. In terms of what happens when they come back, the experts will be looking at it, but I have got no doubt there's a fair bit of trauma there. I don't know any of us could imagine if our kids were dragged to those war zones and terror zones and we've all seen some of the images of what Sharrouf exposed his kids too. These kids need to be given a little bit of room and a lot of love. Probably if they can get a lot of love then I suspect that will be the best way to help reabsorb them into Australian life.
 
JOURNALIST: South Australian irrigators have been told over the last 24 hours they will only get 14 per cent of the allocation which they were hoping they would get. They feared they might get 50 per cent, they were hoping to get 100 per cent. What is Labor's plan to fix the Murray and does it include or could it include resparking up this $2.2 billion desalination plant that we have here?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all there are no jobs on a dead river. And South Australia has been handed the rough edge of the pineapple when it comes to the current Federal Government. Labor put in place the plan for the basin, getting the balance right between river survival and therefore job survival and fish survival, and ecological survival, and agricultural needs. There’s no doubt to my mind that for anyone who cares about the future of the Murray-Darling Basin, anyone who lives in South Australia, anyone who is concerned about the fish kills that we saw this January and over the Christmas holidays, this Government has failed. So we want to put the Basin Plan back on top. Obviously we want to bring all the stakeholders together, including South Australia, southern irrigators and northern irrigators, because at the moment, this is an ecological disaster and the story in The Advertiser really spelt that out pretty clearly I think.
 
JOURNALIST: Will you sack the CFMEU's Michael Ravbar from the Labor national executive now he's been fined by the Federal Court?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, that will be a matter for the national executive. No-one is above the law. Unionist, banker, Clive Palmer. No-one is above the law. But in terms of the national executive matters, I will leave that to the Labor Party.
 
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's appropriate that Sam Dastyari's employer will make a motza out of today's announcement?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, Mr Dastyari is no longer a senator. He paid a pretty big price, I think, for mistakes he made. I'm not about to get – he's got a right to a life after politics, as I think all political people do. But I’ve just got to go to this issue of pathology. Is the Government really arguing that we shouldn't be investing more in pathology? Is the Government really arguing that we shouldn't put downward pressure on the cost of pathology so that we can make sure that we maintain our bulk billing system? If they are arguing that then they are more out of touch than I originally thought. Thanks, everyone.
 
JOURNALIST: On the weekend you made some very strong comments about people spending more than $3,000 managing tax affairs, you said it was a loophole and a rort. Are you surprised organisations like the CPA and the Institute of Public accountants are making such partisan opposition to that during the election campaign? Usually they would be a bit less in the thick of the political campaign.
 
SHORTEN: I think our CPAs are excellent. Love accountants. I notice there was the usual propaganda from News Limited which said that we are against the professions. We’re not. But really, in this country, can we afford to be giving away millions of dollars of tax subsidy to people for the cost of minimising their tax already? I mean we are talking about the taxes which nurses and tradies pay to Canberra. I would rather use that taxpayer money for the best schools in the world, for the best TAFE, for the best aged care, for the best health care system. It is a matter of priorities. Am I surprised that a vested interest whose business model relies upon tax subsidies isn't happy if we are going to reform it? No. I get why they might not like it. But we’ve got to ask ourselves in this country, are we just a country who wants to maintain tax subsidies and loopholes for the big end of town, or are we a country who wants to invest in our people? At the end of the day, we are not changing the ability of accountants to do work for their customers. We are just saying that perhaps once you are paying over $3,000 a year to an accountant you shouldn't be able to deduct that off your tax. It is not, it is not how it has been characterised in News Limited and I expect to see more of these dishonest scare campaigns about Labor. But at some point the political process in this country has got to put ordinary people back at the top of the pile. We’ve got to start saying, “Do you want your kids not to be able to get all the classes they need, be they kids who need special needs, or be they kids who need extensions and advancements in their class?” Do we want to be a country who can't afford to be alongside you when you are in the fight of your life on cancer? Do we want to be a country who does nothing on climate change? Do we want to be a country who just says, well, we'd rather give a tax subsidy to someone claiming $1 million and let them write that off their tax when they have already minimised their tax beyond that? It’s all about choices and values. We want to run an economy which is fair and decent, not one which supports lower wages and cuts to real services.
 
Thanks, everybody.

SUBJECT/S: Notre Dame, Liberals’ $40 billion secret cuts

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITON: [Audio cuts in] I imagine we would feel if Sydney – if the Opera House was to catch fire or Sydney Harbour Bridge. It's devastating for the world.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
 
SHORTEN: I've been there, I remember when I first was a young backpacker it was one of the – in the time before GPS, Notre Dame was one of the ways you would navigate around Paris, on the island in the middle of the Seine. More recently, I remember running through the early morning streets, doing a run through Paris, and you run past the brooding, gothic cathedral that is Notre Dame.

It's devastating. I would like to echo something that Malcolm Turnbull has just said. I think Australia should contribute to a restoration fund. Notre Dame doesn't just belong to Paris or France, it belongs to the world. I think we, all of us who've enjoyed that architecture, that history, we too should perhaps rally around and help Paris and Notre Dame.

JOURNALIST: So if restoration were a decision for a Shorten Government to take, what would you do?
 
SHORTEN: I think it's worth Australia investing in the restoration of Notre Dame. Notre Dame doesn't just belong to Paris or France, it belongs to the world.

JOURNALIST: Before we let you go this morning, there is a report that the Government's numbers, as such,a Grattan Institute examination suggests that it could be $40 billion a year short on its surplus unless it picks – or cuts in harder with taxes or something, or spending cuts to pay the difference, your response?
 
SHORTEN: The whistle has been blown on the Government's secret cuts to spending in the Budget. This Government is promising tax cuts in five years’ time for some people, but it's doing it on the basis of $40 billion worth of cuts. The secret’s out, this is a government with secret cuts to spending in its Budget to fund its promises on the never-never, for tax cuts.
 
JOURNALIST: Finally, were you surprised by that? Did that shock you or were those numbers you'd seen in the Budget and expected?

SHORTEN: This government has form. They've never seen an education or health profile that they didn't want to cut the spending to. What this means for every day Australians is that the problems we've seen with increasing costs of healthcare, longer waiting lists, underfunded schools – the Liberals have form.
 
When it comes to a choice between looking after the top end of town and looking after schools and hospitals, sadly, they always look after the top end of town first.

ENDS

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s Medicare Cancer Plan; Newspoll; election 2019; Four Corners

DAVID KOCH, HOST: But now to other news, a bit closer to home and Bill Shorten is promising to fund $200 million worth of free blood tests for cancer patients and older Australians on day six of the federal election campaign. The Opposition Leader has already pledged to invest $2.3 billion to fight cancer. Yesterday announced a quarter of a billion dollars to free up waiting times in public hospitals. But questions have been raised over Shorten's costing as he denies it's been massively underfunded.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins us now from Melbourne. Good morning to you. Now you've promised to invest $2.3 billion to slash out-of-pocket costs for cancer patients. The Coalition says it's an irresponsible hoax that will actually cost billions more than you say it's going to. What do you say to that?

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I'd say last week, the Government said there wasn't a problem with cancer funding, they said it's all free. This week, now they're saying we're not spending enough.

The fact of the matter is that when you're in the fight of your life, you shouldn't have to be worried about the out-of-pockets. So we're going to increase bulk billing from about 40 per cent-plus to 80 per cent. I think that cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. And we absolutely believe we're on the right track.

I mean Medicare should be there for when you need it. And when it comes to cancer, one in two Australians will be diagnosed by cancer in their life. We just want to make sure that people don't have to be distracted by massive out-of-pocket bills which is the current problem.

KOCH: Look, this is the first time we've spoken to you since the election was called. The first Newspoll of the campaign has you well ahead of Scott Morrison: 52-48 two party preferred. Based on that, it would be a landslide to Labor. Is this your election to lose?

SHORTEN: Oh, I'm not getting ahead of myself. What we're going to do is not focus so much on the Government and the personalities but on our plan for the future. I think Australians are sick of an economy which isn't working for them. The fact of the matter is the cost of childcare has gone up under this government. The cost of seeing the doctor has gone up. The cost of energy bills have gone up. In fact, everything's gone up except people's wages and I think what Australians want is a plan for the future. That's why we're going to take real action on climate change and restore all the cuts to schools and hospitals. It's about putting people in the middle of decision making.

BARR: Earlier today, we spoke to the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. What is your response to claims a Shorten Government would be the highest taxing government in Australian history?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we don't accept that. This is the Government who's raised more taxes than anyone before us. And as our promises come out during the course of the election campaign, this government untruth will be exposed for what it is.

But let's be clear here: it's all about choices in this election. This government wants to give tax cuts to the top end of town, this government wants to keep spending taxpayer money on subsidies to the lucky few. We want to make sure that we've got better hospitals and schools, that's what we want to do with our scarce government resources, look after working and middle class families.

KOCH: All right. While we've got you Bill Shorten, the children of notorious terrorist Khaled Sharrouf have pleaded to be allowed to come back home to Australia after years living in Islamic State territory. Their grandma told Four Corners program on the ABC last night they pose no threat to Australia. If you were Prime Minister, would you let them back in?

SHORTEN: Well I don't hold the children responsible for the mistakes of their parents. You know I don't know all the circumstances but I can understand why a grandmother wants to see her grandchildren safe at home.

What I don't understand is what on earth possessed the parents, one, to pursue this hateful ideology of the terrorist ISIS organisation but dragging your kids into the middle of a war zone, no parent who loves their children would do that, would they?
 
KOCH: But you'd like them back in?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think you've got to work on that. We've got to make the kids safe. It's difficult. We'll work with the security agencies but I don't hold the kids responsible for the mistakes of their parents and I think that's just the humane thing to do, isn't it?
 
KOCH: Yep. All right Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us.

ENDS

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan to blitz elective surgery waiting lists; hospitals funding; health costings; Malcolm Turnbull; Clive Palmer; Electric Vehicles; Peter Dutton being toxic; Election debates; cancer victim.

SIMON CURTIS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LA TROBE: G’day everyone. Thank you for joining us here at Casey Hospital here in Berwick in the seat of La Trobe. I’m Simon Curtis, I’m Labor’s candidate for the upcoming seat, for the upcoming election. I’m really thrilled to be here today with Bill Shorten our leader, with Catherine King, Labor’s shadow health spokesperson. I’m here together with Anthony Byrne as well, our neighbouring MP for Holt. We’ve got some really exciting announcements today on health, here at the hospital, and what that will really do for our community. Thanks, Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. It’s great to be here at Casey Hospital in Melbourne’s south eastern suburbs. You were just hearing from Simon Curtis, Labor’s candidate for La Trobe. I’m really pleased to announce that a Labor Government, if elected on May 18, will contribute an additional $250 million to help reduce waiting lists for elective surgery in this country. I just want to unpack that term waiting lists for a moment. It sort of sounds benign doesn’t it, the word waiting lists, the words waiting lists, it’s like waiting for a spot in a restaurant. But waiting lists in the health context are anything but benign. I just got to catch up with a gentleman called Leigh, his father’s been waiting and he’s now had a double knee replacement and a double hip replacement. That waiting time is painful. When we talk about waiting lists increasing 10 per cent under the Liberal National Government in Canberra, what that means, is it means a lot of our fellow Australians, hundreds of thousands of them, are waiting longer to have painful, painful surgery resolved.
 
If you want to be Prime Minister of Australia, the pain which ordinary Aussies are going through should be a priority. That's why Labor is going to find additional money in our budget because we prioritise reducing the waiting times of our fellow Australians. That's what this announcement is about, $250 million, which is about helping Australians get more timely treatment. The thing with a lot of the surgeries is once you have the surgery, it works. The cataracts removed, the hip replacements, the arthroscopies, the knee surgery. So once you get the surgery it actually puts people back in control. But the longer you keep people waiting to get this surgery, well that means that you're collaborating and keeping people in pain longer than they otherwise should.
 
That's why Labor is going to make the economic reforms we are, because why should Australians wait longer while the top end of town enjoy unsustainable tax subsidies? This election is not about a whole set of complicated personality issues, what it’s about is choices. I'm here in the fast growing corridor of the south eastern suburbs of Melbourne, talking to staff, talking to patients, talking to the experts. We want to reduce the waiting times which our fellow Australians are experiencing. If we can help alleviate the pain which our fellow Australians are living with right now in their lounge rooms, as they wait for the phone call to find out when their surgery is on then that is actually the right thing to do.
 
What I’d now like to do is invite Catherine King to talk a little further about this announcement, and I should also say here today, and it’s great, it is a testament to Simon Curtis and Anthony Byrne’s work and Catherine King, that Labor will also put $22.4 million into a mental health in-patient ward. There are some real challenges in the outer suburbs of Australia, not just the outer suburbs, but the south eastern suburbs of Melbourne have not been immune to the tragedies, clusters of young people self-harming and worse. This in-patient ward will make sure people who require the help get it now. You know the problem with our system is that sometimes we can triage people then we push them back out into the world and without that further assistance, then the inevitable happens. I would like to hand over to Catherine now.
 
CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, Bill, and looks it’s terrific to be here with Simon Curtis, our candidate for La Trobe, and my friend and colleague Anthony Byrne to make this very important announcement around elective surgery waiting lists of $250 million out of Labor’s Better Hospitals Fund to ensure we can get elective surgery waiting lists down.  One in 10 patients across Australia wait over a year for cataract surgery, hip or knee replacements. And that’s a year in pain, a year often unable to work or unable to go about their daily activities. These waiting lists have grown by 10 per cent since the Liberal Party came to office.
 
When Labor was last in office, we had a National Partnership Agreement with every state and territory government to improve our public hospitals, to get elective surgery waiting lists down. And what happened? They came to power and in that horror 2014 Budget, they cut funding to public hospitals and they abolished the Public Hospital Improvement Fund, including the money to get elective surgery waiting times down. Now we want to re-invest, again, in our public hospital system to make sure that patients across the community can get the care that they need. I'm proud also, as part of our Better Hospitals Fund, that we're announcing today $22.4 million to build an in-patient mental health unit. I started my career out here in Endeavour Hills, I did my first social work placement at Endeavour Hills Community Health Centre. And I cannot believe coming back here several years later to see the huge population growth here. I know Anthony and Simon, in particular, have been very concerned and have worked very hard to ensure that they get an increase in mental health services here in this community, so we're very proud to make this announcement that that mental health in-patient unit will be built here. I also just want to briefly make some comments about the current Prime Minister and the current Health Minister's attacks on Labor's cancer plan.
 
Last week, the current Prime Minister had the gall to say that “there are no out-of-pocket costs for cancer patients. It is all free. There's no need to put any more money in. It's alright for cancer patients”. And what we've heard over the course of the last week is patients coming out overwhelmingly across the country and telling their personal stories about the costs of cancer care for them. Labor wants to do something about it. And it's time the Government either put up or shut up. Either, there is no problem to see here, or, cancer patients are paying too much. Labor wants to do something about it, it's about time the current Prime Minister and the current Health Minister actually also agreed with Labor and started funding better care for our cancer patients.
 
SHORTEN: Thanks, Catherine. Are there any questions on this or other matters?
 
JOURNALIST: This new Medicare item number that Labor is proposing, why would a doctor accept a fee that's lower than what they can currently receive with the Medicare rebate they get plus the out-of-pocket they can get from a patient?
 
SHORTEN: Because the doctors want patients. The beauty of having the bulk-billing is that if you don't want to bulk-bill for the higher amount of money which you're getting, so we're giving the specialist or the service more than they're currently getting under Medicare, but if you don't want that patient, they'll have more choices. Because once we lift the rates at which we reimburse for the treatment or the particular procedures, what that means is that if you don't want to do that and you want to charge more, someone down the road is actually going to accept the new, more generous fee and see more patients. So it is competition, friends, and competition is going to, I think, provide a better service.
 
It's estimated that we will increase bulk-billing rates from somewhere below 50 per cent to somewhere around 80 per cent. But let's go to the heart of the matter – and I think Catherine said it pretty well – last week or when I made my Budget Reply speech, we saw the Government just basically say you know, I don't know, in a fit of jealously – whatever – they just couldn't wrap their heads around how the real system works, they're out-of-touch, so what they said over a week ago, is they said: "well there’s no need to look at Labor's new plans to help with out-of-pocket costs for cancer because there aren't any. It’s all free in the public system."  Well this is a case where fantasy met reality. We have been inundated with touching stories, real stories, and I’m sure some of you either know them, have seen them or you might indeed be affected yourselves, or have family affected.
 
There’s a massive out-of-pocket crisis in terms of costs for cancer. But I notice that the Government having initially said there was no problem have now said that Labor is not funding it enough. You’ve got to love these guys, they’re the cheeky brigade of Australian politics. They’re either saying we’re not doing enough or we’re doing too much.  Well let's just put all their noise, their white noise of their failed policies of cuts in hospitals and health care to one side. Let's put to the side the fact that they froze the patient rebate. Labor has got an exciting plan on cancer. Cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. And the fact of the matter is there are literally hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians in the fight of their lives and one of the greatest concerns they have isn't recovery - it's how will their family cope with paying the bills. We want to take that burden away from Australians.
 
JOURNALIST: In regards to hospitals funding, Mr Shorten, will you commit to restoring federal funding for hospitals to a 50-50 split with the states, even if that ratio, 50 per cent, is more than $2.8 billion?
 
SHORTEN: We've said we'll work towards 50-50, so the answer is yes. Our best estimates is that this has been a cut of $2.8 billion, and what I do appreciate about your question is, your question recognises the truth of what's happened. This government, this Federal Government, has decreased the proportion it contributes to the states. I'll get Catherine to supplement it, but in Victoria alone, our policy is funded because of our strong economic reform agenda, about reforming taxation, making multinationals pay their fair share. It means that in the next five years we can stop the cut of $635 million to Victorian hospitals which this government is proposing. But I’ve got Catherine here and she is very keen to talk about this.
 
I’ll come to you in a moment mate, thanks.
 
KING: I just want to remind people about what’s actually happened here. In the 2013 election campaign, if you go back and you look at the Liberal Party's health policy pamphlet, basically, it clearly states the Liberal Party will support the transition to the Commonwealth paying 50 per cent of activity-based funding. That's what the Liberal Party said. They said they would match Labor's agreements with every state and territory on that. And what happened? They are now paying 45 per cent. The difference between 45 and 50 is $2.8 billion cut out of our public hospital system. Now Labor will take the Commonwealth share back to 50 per cent. But what we're also going to do is make sure we get elective surgery under control at our hospitals. We want to put $250 million back in to making sure that we actually get elective surgery waiting times down. We’ve also announced $500 million in addition to this for cancer patients, in outpatients and in surgery within our public hospitals. Labor will always, always fund our public hospitals better than the Liberal Party ever do.
 
JOURNALIST: You say that the cancer plan is about boosting competition, but haven't you given the impression to voters that all cancer treatment will be free if you're elected?
 
SHORTEN: No but we’ve said we are going to radically reduce the out-of-pockets. I can't stop a patient who just wants to go exclusively for private treatment and doesn’t want to go through the bulk-billing system. And nor should I if that's what someone wants to do. But what I can say to hundreds of thousands of Australians is that Labor will be alongside you in the fight of your life. The unarguable facts, the black and white facts, the unarguable proposition is that we, because we are going to wind back unsustainable tax concessions at the top end, and we’re going to wind back some of the free ride that multinationals have been having, so that we can pay for the most significant injection of new funds for cancer treatment since Medicare was created.
 
JOURNALIST: The Government tells us, right or wrong, that funding for this local area health network is up 89 per cent on 2012-13. Now that figure might be wrong, I can't vouch for that. Can you tell us, is the funding is up almost 90 per cent and if so, haven't you just walked into an example of actually pretty good government commitment to health?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, as you would know, this is a very fast-growing region. I don't know if you're aware, but Casey in the south-east, in this region, 362,000 people live here which is a massive growth on 10 years ago. It's projected these suburbs we are in now are going to grow to 560,000 people. There is no doubt in my mind that this Federal Government has walked away from promises it made to help the states fund 50 per cent of the health system, of the hospital system here.
 
This government tends to play a game with numbers. They tend to say because the population has increased and they're forced to spend more money than they previously did, that's the end of the matter. No, it is not. If you've promised Australians to meet 50 per cent of the hospital component, then you go back to 45 per cent, that is a cut, it is a cut, it is a cut. And the reality is that waiting times have gone up. So I don’t think it’s enough for the Government to say that they’re doing more than they once did, therefore they’re excused. The reality is that this is a cut on what they promised. It is not keeping pace with population growth. Take, for example, the mental health announcement we just made. There are tragedies in these communities. There are clusters of our young people who are self-harming, and worse. There have been funerals here where there’s been a thousand people and kids, they go along, where someone has taken their life. There are clusters of behaviour we need to help people with. It is not enough for this government to say that a patch-up job, not even keeping pace with the out-of-pockets is good enough. It’s just not. We want to promise Australians that if you have a diagnosis of cancer or someone you love has, we are going to invest more support than you've ever had before in the fight of your life.
 
JOURNALIST: Is health spending here at record levels, Mr Shorten, or is it not? It is a simple question - it is or it isn't?
 
SHORTEN: No, it is not a simple question because of this, the population growth ...
 
JOURNALIST: Is it at record levels or not?
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, you keep asking the question.
 
JOURNALIST: You keep dodging the question by not answering it, so is it at record levels or not. Because this is one of the confounding issues over the election campaign over whether you say there is more money on education or health or whether the Government says there is record levels on education and health. Simply, is it at record levels or not?
 
SHORTEN: This is a government who promised to spend a certain amount of money in order to get people's votes and then they broke their promise. This is a government who has cut $14 billion off what they promised in public schools. That's a fact. This is a government who promised to pay 50 per cent to the states for the administration and help in their hospitals and are paying 45 per cent. That is a cut. And unfortunately, we have a government who thinks that not keeping their promise, cutting services, is good enough. I tell you what, I’ve got a different plan. I’ve got a plan for all Australians, not just the corporates. The fact of the matter is that this government has pursued one economic plan for the last three years – a corporate tax cut for the big end of town. This government is fighting tooth and nail to retain unsustainable tax giveaways to the top end of town. They have not done enough to make multinationals pay their bills. So I'm not satisfied with the Government's history or record on these matters but indeed it’s not me who has to be satisfied, it is the Australian people. I'm the only leader in this election, out of me and the other fellow, who’s offering to put extra money into cancer. Is anyone here seriously saying that extra money into cancer is a bad idea? Is anyone seriously saying here that extra money into mental health to stop young people taking their lives is a bad idea? I didn't think so.
 
JOURNALIST: What consultations or procedures would be covered under this new Medicare item number? Is it all cancers or just certain cancers?
 
SHORTEN: It’s cancers, howsoever they are. We're not picking different cancers. But I might get Catherine to talk a bit further about the range of propositions that we’re going to do to help people with their out-of-pockets.
 
KING: It’s all cancers. And what we'll be doing is working both with the Diagnostic Imaging Association and health professionals there, as well as the cancer specialists to design new Medicare items, new Medicare bulk-billed items, to actually drive down the costs for patient care. We have got some work to do. This measure starts in 2020. We have got some work to do with both of those professions but we are very confident, particularly when it comes to consultations for cancer patients, that we can get the bulk-billing up from where it currently sits, so a cancer patients 36 per cent up to that 80 per cent that we've said publicly.
 
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about Malcolm Turnbull giving support to independents?
 
SHORTEN: No. No, I'm not. I think the issue though for the Government is that three years ago they said, "Vote for Malcolm Turnbull." All of them – Mr Morrison, Mr Dutton. They all queued up to have their photo taken with Mr Turnbull. They said, "If you vote Liberal and Malcolm Turnbull, that's what you'll have for three years." Ever since then they've had division and dysfunction and disunity. So I think that the one question, for instance the local member here in La Trobe, Jason Wood, he voted for Peter Dutton. He was happy to have Peter Dutton as Prime Minister but he's not happy to be photographed with Peter Dutton in his own electorate. The same goes for the Health Minister, the same goes for a range of Liberals in the south-east corridor. They gave Australia dysfunction and division, they’ve annoyed a lot of voters on the way through. I think the one question they have all got to explain is why isn't Malcolm Turnbull still Prime Minister of Australia?
 
JOURNALIST: On the question of independents, are you prepared to seek assurances of supply and confidence if necessary after the election?
 
SHORTEN: We’re intending to form a majority Government. That's the case we'll put to the Australian people.
 
JOURNALIST: What if you don't form a majority...
 
SHORTEN: Well, before you write off our chances, I won't.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Josh Wilson has said that Israeli checkpoints are places where people go to die. Julian Hill and Cathy O’Toole have made similar criticisms of checkpoints. Sue Lines has attacked the Israeli lobby in a speech, and Andrew Leigh once wrote that Australia needs to stop Israel going down a self-destructive path. Are you out of line with your MPs on increasing support for Israel? For Palestine, sorry.
 
SHORTEN: First of all, the MPs, Mr Wilson and Senator Lines have re-confirmed again this morning that they support Labor Party policy. For the sake of clarity, the Israeli Ambassador representing the Israeli Government said they could work with both sides of politics. Labor Party policy is very clear, and all of my candidates and members have signed up to it – a two state solution. Sorry, let me answer your questions. Our policy is very clear, we support a two-state solution – that is the right of Israel to exist behind safe and secure borders, and the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for statehood.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, this morning you talked about lifting wages for people down at Spotswood. What do you say to small businesses who are going to pay extra to their staff? Are you telling them that they'll have to absorb the costs of passing on higher wages to their workers?

SHORTEN: We’ve got a lot of good news for small business. First of all that you can vote for either side of politics with the comfort of knowing that we are both committed to businesses under $50 million, reducing their tax rate from 30 to 25 per cent. So that’s good news. That frees up money for small business. But we’ve also got another exciting proposition for small business, which has been very well received when we explain it to people. It’s this. We want to give an accelerated depreciation to businesses who invest in productive investment greater than $20,000. Or to put in plain English, if a company, say they run a food business, want to buy a new fridge, what we are going to do under a Labor Government, and this hasn't been matched by the conservatives, is add 20 per cent extra tax deductibility on the investment. So if they are making a marginal decision to invest $200,000, under a Labor Government they'll be able to deduct, on top of what they can already deduct, an extra $40K. So this is good for small business.
In terms of wages, a lot of things get said about wages. We just simply say this – the problem in Australia is everything is going up except your wages. We want to have a discussion, we want to have a living wage not just a minimum wage. And what we want with that is to implement it in a consultative fashion. One of the things which has been lost in the Government's fear campaign is the detail that any wage increase has to be agreed by the independent umpire, and then it has to be implemented on economic capacity to pay. So I get that small business is hearing all sorts of, you know, scary and mad things from the Government. But I just, through you, Shane, want to reassure small business – we're the equal on tax, we're better on the deductibility for investment, and when it comes to wages we get that you have to implement these things in a modest and meaningful way. We have got to acknowledge capacity to pay. And, beyond that, when millions of Australians, be they people on the pension, be they wage earners, are experiencing wage stagnation, massive cost of living increases pressures, that means people have less to spend in the small businesses.
We need to be an economy which sees growth not just for big business, but for all Australians. And millions of Australian wage earners are now dipping into their household savings, living on the credit card far more than they should. That's because we’ve got a government who is out of touch and doesn't get the central importance of cost of living. Who’s next?

JOURNALIST: Clive Palmer has agreed to pay back Queensland Nickel...

SHORTEN: Oh, well done, Clive.

JOURNALIST: Does that make him more of a threat in the Senate?

SHORTEN: Listen, we talked about small business before. Most Australian businesses know they have to pay their workers every week, fortnight, or month. This guy wants a medal for, after a couple of years, to pay back money which the taxpayers had to subsidise. Do you know what I find it amazing? He could find $20 million or $30 million for TV advertising and billboards but he couldn't find the money to pay his workers. Ninety-nine per cent of reputable employers in this country pay the workers first, then pay for their own head to be on a billboard, not the other way around.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about your fuel efficiency policy. Do you rule out exempting vehicles that sell less than 2,500 units from the policy?

SHORTEN: This is this government scare campaign. They can't work out who they are most days, this government. On one hand they say that electric vehicles are a bad idea. Now they’re saying that there’s a plan to exempt the rich. Can we just all tune out the Government noise on this and let's go to the fundamentals of our electric vehicle policy. By 2030, we have a target, that 50 per cent of new cars in Australia are electric-powered. Now this is not going to be as hard a target to reach as some say because from 2025, big companies like Toyota are only going to be making electric vehicles. Under this bunch of vandals called the Liberal Government of Australia, they got rid of our car industry. The fact of the matter is that Hyundai –Hyundai is a Korean company, is not greatly interested in Australian politics, but even Hyundai has had to come out and just set some facts on the record. No one’s ute is going to be confiscated. You can buy whatever car you want. But what this government actually wants you to do is to say to Australians: "We're going to give you old technology only. We don't want you buying cars which are going to be cheaper in the future and which are more fuel efficient." I mean, this is a government who wants to deny the car-buying public of Australia choice, competition and lower prices for cars.

JOURNALIST: On the fuel efficiency policy do you rule out that exemption for low-selling vehicles?

SHORTEN: For low-selling vehicles? Which vehicle models are you talking about?

JOURNALIST: Vehicles that sell 2,500 or less.

SHORTEN: For example? For example, which ones are they?

JOURNALIST: The Climate Change Authority which your policy is based on...

SHORTEN: I'm not familiar with those elite motor vehicles. Which sort of cars are you talking about?

JOURNALIST: Well, a lot are them are quite expensive cars, low-selling cars, are they going to be exempt under the policy?

SHORTEN: No, what is going to happen is that you’ve got to be fuel efficient and we are going to sit down with industry and work on it. But somehow if the Government is trying to say that Labor has a secret plot for there to be more Rolls-Royces in the garages, no, that’s just more sort of daily madness from the Government.

JOURNALIST: Do you have concerns about the Government asking the Health Department to cost your policies?

SHORTEN: Oh Lord. The Government, they've had six years and now all they can do is talk about us. Do you know my concern with the Government is that they haven’t worked out that out-of-pocket costs in cancer are a real issue. My concern with the Government is that they're not matching our proposal to have a mental health in-patient ward here. This government has had six years to come up with their great ideas in health. All they've done is cut. They haven't kept the promises they made early on. And as a result Australians have missed out.
JOURNALIST: Malc … Scott Morrison has nominated...

SHORTEN: Yeah, I know, it's confusing, don’t worry most Australians make that mistake.

JOURNALIST: ... April 29 or 30 for the Perth leadership debate. Will you accept either of those dates?

SHORTEN: Oh listen, I've got my diary, I spoke to the West Australian, we’ll give them two dates and I hope Mr Morrison can fit in with us. Mr Morrison – all of a sudden – he didn’t want to have Parliament now all of a sudden I’ve got to change my whole campaign to suit him. We will have debates. We will do the best we can to fit in with every state and every media outlet but there’s only 33 days or 34 days left.

JOURNALIST: On Peter Dutton, Labor have been running a hard campaign here in Victoria. Is he an electoral asset for you?

SHORTEN: I don't think the current Prime Minister or Mr Dutton have satisfactorily explained to Victorian voters or Australian voters why Malcolm Turnbull is no longer the Prime Minister. But Catherine King was the Shadow Minister for Health when that fellow was the Health Minister, so I would be keen to hear her insights.

KING: Peter Dutton is one of the most toxic people in Australian politics. We saw what he did to Labor's candidate in Dickson, the disgraceful comments he made saying that she was using her disability as somehow an excuse not to move into the electorate. Peter Dutton was the worst health minister in Australian history. And that’s not just me saying that, that was the Australian Medical Association, every doctor in the country said this is what this fellow did. And he was only Health Minister for one year. What did he do in that year? He wanted to impose a GP Tax on every single person, banking on massive savings with less people going to see the doctor, for their Budget. He cut $57 billion out of public hospitals. That’s what Peter Dutton did. Peter Dutton wanted everybody to pay more, including pensioners, for their medicines. This was Peter Dutton’s legacy as Health Minister, so you betcha we are going to be absolutely out there every day talking about Peter Dutton's record as Health Minister because 40 of his colleagues not that long ago, just a few scant months ago, wanted him to be Prime Minister of this nation, including Michael Sukkar in Deakin, including Jason Wood here in La Trobe and including the current Health Minister Greg Hunt all wanted this man, the worst Health Minister in Australia’s history, to be our Prime Minister.

SHORTEN: One more question, is there someone who hasn't had a go?

ROB: Mr Shorten, you're promising money for cancer. Now, I'm a CFA volunteer who has got cancer. I was promised by Mr Andrews, the Labor Premier, in 2015 that he would look after me. Mr Shorten, how are we supposed to believe your potential government when Mr Andrews has done nothing but make my life hard and that of other people, volunteers, with cancer. Honestly, Bill, it's just hard to believe that you're saying going to help out with cancer and everything else for people. I've spent the last four years in and out of hospital that long that my daughter is worried that is her dad ever going to come home. I have a six-year-old daughter.

SHORTEN: What's your first name, sorry?

ROB: Rob.

SHORTEN: Okay Rob, I appreciate you asking the question. I want to thank the media for letting somebody who is not a journalist to help us finish off the press conference. Rob, I’m going to take some time and have a chat to you after the conference because I want to understand what has happened. In terms of the contamination or the cancer would that be Fiskville?

ROB: No.

SHORTEN: What I would like to do is talk to you to understand the background. But in terms of how we pay for cancer in this country, I can't speak for Mr Andrews. I can pass on your disappointment to him, but I can't speak for him. But what I can speak for is – I haven't been Prime Minister in the last four years but if I am Prime Minister I do want to reduce your out of pocket costs. Now if you've had a very fortunate experience of everything's been free, that's great. But I can tell by the fact you’re shaking your head that that hasn’t happened. I want to do better. I apologise for what you've had to go through. I don't feel responsible for the current Government, but as anyone in public life I hate to see someone who has been a volunteer, you’ve got a six-year-old daughter, you're in the battle of your life – that's tough. What I can say to you is we are going to fund six million extra scans. What I can say to you and to everyone else is that we are going to fund three million extra visits to the specialists. What I can say to you is we are going to fund cancer research, put an extra $125 million into that. What I can say to you is that we are putting an extra $500 million into our hospitals. Rob, you don't have to believe anyone but I'm going to have a chat to you. I just want to understand because, to me, what you're talking about is the exact reason why I'm running for Prime Minister. You know, we can make all the chats about all of the other issues and the gossip and the Peter Dutton’s and the disputes, I get that sort of annoys people. If you're in the fight of your life, I am interested in your story, you matter to me, regardless of who wins or loses. So I appreciate you being here and I want to have a chat to you. Thanks, Rob, I think that's a pretty good note to end it on but we'll see each other on the trail. Thanks, everybody.

ENDS

ANNE CHARLTON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR ROBERTSON: I’m Anne Charlton, I’m Labor’s candidate for Robertson in the upcoming federal election and welcome to the sunny central coast. It’s great to have you all here today. Today I am joined by Leader of the Labor Party and the next Prime Minister of Australia, Bill Shorten, and our fabulous Shadow Minister for Health, Catherine King, and the rest of the Labor team. Bill’s been a regular visitor to this patch and it’s great to have him back here with 4,000 young women and girls who play netball. It’s such an important part of our local sporting family and to have Bill here today, meeting and greeting and talking about such important things like sunscreen and making sure that we have got what we need in our local community. So thank you Bill for coming and it is great to have you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Anne and good morning everybody. It’s great to be here on the Central Coast. I’m feeling a little bit of parent guilt. I’m a netball dad, I love seeing netball and my own daughters play it. We’re here today though for a very good purpose. Australia is the skin cancer capital of the world. Two out of every three Australians by the time they're 70 will get a diagnosis of skin cancer. Even worse, over 2,000 Australians will die this year because of skin cancer-related illnesses. And the thing about skin cancer, unlike perhaps some of the other cancers, is it's almost entirely preventable. I think it is very clever when Anne Charlton and the team suggested coming here because what these young girls who are playing netball are told every day by their parents when they go out to play netball is make sure that you put on some sunscreen. That's what Chloe always tells our kids when they walk out the door. But it is now overdue for the nation to take a guide from the parents of Australia and have a national campaign to tackle skin cancer by preventing it. This is one cancer where we can actually have a massive impact through sensible prevention. It has been over 10 years since the nation has had a national campaign to encourage young people - all Australians in fact - to slip, slop, slap. So today we're announcing, in conjunction with the Cancer Council, Slip, Slop, Slap 2.0. After a decade of inaction we now want to have a national advertising campaign to encourage Australians to take preventive action when they go out into the sun. We don't have to be the skin cancer capital of the world. It's up to us to prevent it. We've learnt a lot in recent decades but it is now time, just as we have done with our tobacco prevention campaigns, just as we’ve done with the rest of our packages to fight the scourge of cancer. It’s now time after a decade of not taking action, to have a national Slip, Slop, Slap campaign 2.0. I would like to invite Catherine King to talk further and then we will have a guest from the Cancer Council to talk even more about what we're going to do.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks very much Bill and all week we've been talking about Labor's $2.3 billion Medicare cancer plan. We've talked about how we want to make scans cheaper. We’ve talked about how we want to make consultations cheaper. We've talked about how we want to deal with the waiting lists in our public hospitals. And today we are talking about prevention. Skin cancer is preventable and it is a decade since we've had a skin cancer prevention campaign. We all remember the fantastic Slip, Slop, Slap campaign. That of course is the basis of which we want to talk today, $8.6 million to the Cancer Council to actually again show national leadership on what is one of our biggest cancers. Australia is the world leader when it comes to skin cancer. Two in three Australians will have a skin cancer by the time they are 70 and each year 2,200 Australians die of melanoma - that is more than the nation's road toll. I'm very proud that we're here with Anne, with Emma, with Cat and with Deb O'Neill and with Kristina Kenneally here where many Australians are every single day, outside playing sport in our fantastic environment. But we do want people to get the message to slip on a shirt, slop on some sunscreen, slap on a hat, slip into the shade and slide on your sunnies. Thanks very much and I am going to hand over to Anita from the Cancer Council to talk about this initiative a little more.

ANITA DESSAIX, CHAIR CANCER COUNCIL: This is a very welcome commitment from the Cancer Council’s point of view. We've heard today about the reasons why this is so incredibly important. We are the skin cancer capital of the world, and that's a title that we shouldn't be proud of. This is a cancer that we're talking about that is highly preventable. The statistics are actually quite shocking. We know that two-in-three Australians will be diagnosed with skin cancer before the age of 70. We all know somebody who has been diagnosed with skin cancer. This is highly preventable. Not only that, we also know that this is the most costly cancer on the health system. It is estimated to cost the health system $700 million and that estimate is growing. This is a big concern not only from a public health point of view and this is highly preventable, but also from the point of view that this is an investment, this is an investment that needs to be made from a cancer prevention point of view. So from the Cancer Council's perspective, an investment in sun protection awareness campaigns is a strong investment. We know research shows that for every dollar invested in skin cancer prevention it has a three-to-one return on investment. From our point of view, we know that these campaigns work. They work on a number of fronts. They remind Australians particularly adults, of the risks of over exposure to the sun. We know that it raises awareness of skin cancer as an issue but most importantly it puts sun protection back on the agenda and that's what’s been missing for the last 10 years. So from our point of view it is an extremely welcome commitment. We look forward to hearing more, and look forward to seeing those hard-hitting very effective sun protection messages grace our screens again.

SHORTEN: Just before we get into questions I should acknowledge that arguably Australia’s best mare is going to be racing later today, Winx I obviously refer to. She is history on four legs. And whilst getting a big bet on her is hard, because she is such low odds, her value isn't in the bet, it’s in the fact that we have got a horse like this which has brought such excitement and passion to racing. I wish her and her connections all the very best for today’s big race.

JOURNALIST: What did Melissa Parke say wrong?

SHORTEN: First of all, let me say about Melissa Parke, she has done the right thing - she doesn't want to be a distraction in the campaign. She has very strong views. I don't share those views but she has very strong views. She has felt in the context of this election campaign that she would become a distraction and she has stepped down. Because Melissa, like all our candidates, cares more about having the Labor Party succeed, than a particular individual.

JOURNALIST: She said her views were very well known for many years, why was she preselected in the first place?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we didn't have a candidate in Curtin until recently. To be fair, neither did the Liberals. She thought she might have another go at politics but she has decided it’s not for her, she’s done the right thing.

JOURNALIST: Which views don't you agree with?

SHORTEN: She has very strong views. I’ve got different views. My view is that a two-state solution in the Middle East is the way to go. And I also have a view that Israel has the right to security behind its own borders and the Palestinian people have a legitimate interest in statehood.

JOURNALIST: Did the party ask her to stand down?

SHORTEN: She made that decision.

JOURNALIST: But this isn’t about her views, it’s about an unfounded claim about Israeli soldiers. Isn’t that a bit more serious?

SHORTEN: No, what it is, it’s about a candidate who has decided she doesn't want to be a distraction.

JOURNALIST: You have called her a fine foreign policy thinker and internationalist in a tribute to her. Do you stand by that assessment today and, if you do, shouldn't a Shorten Government at least factor in her views on the Palestinians?

SHORTEN: There are plenty of views about the Middle East, longer than we have time to debate here at this press conference. In terms of Melissa Parke, she has served the United Nations working with refugees. I'm not about to start attacking her. But she has made a principled decision that she doesn't want her views on a particular topic to become a distraction to the election. I just say to Australians, this shows you how determined Labor is to be united and to present its best foot forward for the people of Australia. What we have here is a team who are determined to get on to the issues that matter most to Australians - that is, of course, turning back the cuts to hospitals and education by this current government. Making sure we can get wages moving again, because at the moment everything is going up but your wages. Seeking real action on climate change and encouraging greater investment in renewable energy, and if we do that of course that will lower energy prices.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

SHORTEN: Yes, Labor will choose a new candidate.

JOURNALIST: She made claims that she saw a pregnant woman forced to drink bleach at the Gaza crossing. Now either that didn't happen and she shouldn't have said it, or it did happen and you should agree with it and say it was the right thing to say.

SHORTEN: Well I wasn't there so I don’t know. What this is a story of is that we have is a candidate who is determined that her views might distract the election and she doesn't want to do that. I respect that. Over to you.

JOURNALIST: I'll take you to a different matter, Alex Turnbull has said on Twitter that he's trying to roll climate change deniers within the Liberal Party. Do you think that party does have climate change deniers, and what do you make of Alex Turnbull?

SHORTEN: The Liberal Party is full of climate change deniers. If they weren't, Malcolm Turnbull would still be the Prime Minister of Australia. The Liberal Party is full of climate change deniers because for six years they've been incapable of forming an energy policy. You would be aware there have been 13 different energy policies in Australia. No wonder energy prices have been going up. Because we have a Government who's paralysed. As for Mr Turnbull's personal actions, I mean, his party bailed out the Liberal Party, the Liberals didn't object to Turnbull money when it was going to them but, clearly, they have a problem with their support going to independents. I think the Liberals - do you know how they'd avoid this whole mess? Take real action on climate change.

JOURNALIST: What were you hoping to achieve in your meeting with Anthony Pratt.

SHORTEN: It was a fundraising function which many people were at and what I was hoping to do was raise money.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Liberal Party has lost three candidates because of section 44 concerns. Can you guarantee there are no such concerns for any Labor candidates?

SHORTEN: Well I've answered this question before. I'm very conscious and I can guarantee that my party is doing everything it can to eliminate any constitutional doubt over any of its candidates. We have had the advantage that a lot of our candidates have been in place. The Liberal Party has, to be honest, had to rush. In plenty of places they've only just got their candidates last week. So I guarantee Australians that my party and the processes of my administrative officials are do everything we can to make sure there is no controversy. You're next.

JOURNALIST: You said Newstart will rise under a Labor Government. Do you envision that being a small, modest or large increase and when would welfare recipients start to see that increase?

SHORTEN: What I envisaged when I said that Newstart should rise is it's pretty low now. I don't know how many of you could live on 260-plus bucks a week. Most Australians couldn't. So I do think it should rise. In terms of how much, we have said we will review it. I wouldn't pre-empt a review. But what I say to people on welfare is a Labor government is not into poor shaming. We’re not into making you the cheap target to divide our community. What we want to see is a robust economy. Obviously the best solution to unemployment is a job. But I don't want to be dividing this country and attacking vulnerable people who could well be unemployed for a whole lot of reasons and making them the target of community resentment.

JOURNALIST: Franking credits and this electorate of Robertson. This electorate has plenty of retirees, many whom might be affected by your policy on franking credits. What is your message to them?

SHORTEN: First of all, this electorate has many pensioners on a fixed income. Literally thousands were kicked off the pension or part-pension by this Government. So I say to the pensioners I haven't forgotten you. And I say to older Australians more generally, be they people getting a Government payment with no means test - which is what these franking credits are - or a Government payment with a means test, which is what our age pension is – I am determined to help reduce the cost of living pressures on you. So for instance we have been very successful in forcing the government in recent weeks, with the hot breath of an election on the neck of the government, to make sure that they unfreeze the Medicare payment. What I will do is make it less unaffordable to go and see the doctor. When you're old you need to see a doctor more. I am going to make sure that in our health system on the Central Coast, just as in every other part of Australia, that what we have is a system where it’s your Medicare card not your credit card. I also say to older Australians a vote for Labor will see downward pressure on electricity prices. It becomes almost like a Steven King film to go and get your electricity bill under this government. They have had no plan on climate and as a result there has been very little investment in new generation. So when it comes to cost of living, when it comes to standing up for the pensioners, when it comes to healthcare costs, we'll be right alongside you.

JOURNALIST: When will the Newstart review start, finish and the increase go into people's bank balances.

SHORTEN: I haven't determined the end of the review but it will start after the election of a Labor Government.

JOURNALIST: ACOSS says $75 would be an appropriate increase to Newstart. What do you think of that figure?

SHORTEN: I think ACOSS is entitled to their point of view. If you are saying that is what ACOSS says then I am sure that is their opinion.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton is doubling down on his attacks on Ali France. What is your response to that?

SHORTEN: I am shocked that, one, Mr Dutton hasn't had the good grace to apologise and, two, that Mr Morrison hasn't asked him to apologise. It just shows me how weak this Government is. Peter Dutton was within three votes of becoming the Liberal Prime Minister of Australia. I think Mr Morrison is acutely conscious of that. So to some extent I don’t understand why Mr Morrison hasn’t asked him to apologise other than I can only conclude that he is a hostage of Mr Dutton. But why don’t we get Kristina Keneally’s point of view. She has been campaigning with Ali France and she was also a Minister for Disabilities in the State Government. So I think she will bring some perspective to these offensive remarks.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thank you. Last week, Scott Morrison stood in front of the nation, called a royal commission into the abuse of people with a disability and he shed tears, he shed tears there in the court yard. I give him credit for bearing his heart, showing his compassion and standing up for people with disability. But this week, Peter Dutton launches a mean, low, despicable attack against a woman with disability, Ali France, a mother who lost her leg shielding her child from a car accident, and Mr Morrison has remained silent. Mr Morrison has said nothing. You cannot stand in the court yard and shed a tear for people with a disability and then the very next week turn a blind eye to a low, despicable attack by Peter Dutton against Ali France. Now, why has Mr Morrison not stood up to Peter Dutton? Why has Mr Morrison not demanded that Mr Dutton apologise? Not just to Ali France but to all the people who live with a disability in Australia, who struggle to find appropriate accommodation, who have to face the challenge of doing the normal day-to-day tasks all of us take for granted with that extra hurdle that disability brings? Quite simply, is Mr Morrison afraid of Mr Dutton? Mr Dutton, after all, is a thug. Mr Dutton is the most toxic man in the Liberal Party. Mr Dutton is mean and despicable. And Mr Dutton came within a few votes of becoming the Liberal Party Prime Minister. This is a Liberal Party that is divided. This is a Liberal Party divided by anger, fear and loathing for one another. Somebody in the Liberal Party needs to stand up to Peter Dutton. That somebody should be Mr Morrison, the Prime Minister. If the Prime Minister, who showed compassion, who showed the nation his heart last week when he stood there, tears in his eyes, talking about people with a disability, well, Mr Morrison, I say to you - have the courage of your compassion and your convictions. Tell Peter Dutton to apologise, apologise to Ali France, apologise to all people with a disability. It is the right and the decent thing to do.

JOURNALIST: Senator, do you think an apology would suffice? Should they go further?

KENEALLY: An apology is where it needs to start. Does Mr Morrison not even have the courage to pick up the phone and call Mr Dutton and say, "Hey, you remember last week when I said” – the Prime Minister said – that was you Mr Morrison saying it, you said – “we need a new culture of respect." He should just pick up the phone and say to Mr Dutton, "You remember when I said that, we need a new culture of respect in Australia for people with a disability.” Well, what you did, Peter Dutton, was not respectful. It was mean, it was low. It was despicable. It was below the belt. It was wrong. That's not how this campaign should be conducted but it's not how anybody should treat a person with a disability. So that's where it needs to start. I am, quite frankly, gobsmacked that Scott Morrison has not yet had the courage to call Mr Dutton and tell him just basically that's not respectful and that's not the standard that I want my team to uphold.

JOURNALIST: On the Easter weekend it appears that GetUp is going to be campaigning during the Easter long weekend. Do you think it is appropriate, given that GetUp is an independent organisation as you say, is it appropriate though?

SHORTEN: I think you answered your own question. It is independent. I wrote to the current Prime Minister and said I thought we should respect days that are sacred  to the nation like Anzac Day and also Good Friday and we put in Easter Sunday. But it is a free country. I can't make everyone else do things. You did say they're independent and that's right. I just also want to go to a deeper point here in light of Kristina's quite impassioned statement there. I met parents back on the court. They are an all-abilities team. So their daughters have actually played for Australia overseas in netball. But they have an intellectual disability, some have been in the Special Olympics. In case there are some people out there who say, “Oh, well, politicians say mean things about other politicians with a disability, that's just part of the the political debate." I just want to say to every Australian parent who has got a child with a disability, we do not accept what has just happened. See, when you are the parent of a child who might be autistic or have an intellectual disability you are frequently judged by ignorant people in your own community. If your child might be acting out, people might say, "You're a bad parent." I’ve got friends who have a disabled child and someone in the crown slipped up to them and said, "Why did you have another child?" when they have two disabled children. Words hurt. Words hurt. We are having a royal commission into abuse of people with disability. Not all vicious words end in abuse, but all abuse of people with a disability started with vicious words.

JOURNALIST: Can we go back to Melissa Parke for a second. I know you said it was her decision to step down so as not to be a distraction but is there not room within the Labor Party for differing views on a major issue like this?

SHORTEN: Our party is democratic and Ms Parke has made a decision to step down.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, it's been reported that you had lunch with [Anthony] Pratt, yesterday, Australia's richest man. Can I ask, did you make any assurances that you'll be looking after the top end of town?

SHORTEN: No, it was a fundraising function. All donations in the Labor Party over $1,000 are reported. Did you know the current Government only reports donations over $13,000. It is a fundraising function, part of the job - for better or for worse.

JOURNALIST: Should the children of ISIS fighters be brought home to Australia?

SHORTEN: It's not the children's fault for what their parents did. I think we have to work out the best approach for the children's welfare. So, that's not a "no". I don't know all the circumstances, I don't know if they have family here to look after them but I don't blame the kids for their parents' stupidity.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question about Adani. Do you absolutely rule out revisiting the groundwater management plan in government?

SHORTEN: We'll adhere to the law. We’ll adhere to the science. I think, though, that what we saw in the last few days was decision making at its worst. The poor, old, beleaguered Environment Minister, who hasn’t appeared comfortable in the job anyway, she gets the letters from the LNP colleagues, the thug brigade of the LNP in Queensland saying unless you do this we will publicly call for your resignation. Then they miraculously leak the threatening letters. I think that is the worst possible way to do business. The sooner this Government is shown the door the better. And the sooner we have a national anticorruption commission, that can't be too soon in this country. Thanks everybody, see you at the town hall meeting.

ENDS

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s Medicare Cancer Plan; Dutton’s attack on the disabled; Israel Folau; politicisation of Treasury; Labor’s plans for a fairer tax system; Perth debate; Julian Assange; NewStart

BRIAN OWLER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BENNELONG: Welcome everyone here to Bennelong it’s great to have everyone come along today and talk more about Labor’s Medicare Cancer plan. I would like to of course welcome Bill Shorten, Catherine King, Kristina Keneally and of course the advocates here from Avner Pancreatic Cancer Foundation. We are going to talk more about Labor’s Medicare Cancer Plan but as most people know I am a neurosurgeon I deal with brain cancer in adults and children. But I also deal with cancers like breast cancers, thyroid, lung cancers, prostate cancer, melanoma, and I work with people on their journey because often those metastasise to the brain and spine. And I’m very proud to stand here talking about Labor’s Medicare Cancer Plan, because I know what a difference it’s going to make for the patients that I see, but all those patients right across the country. Not just financially, but in terms of supporting them through their journey with more cancer care nurses, through CanTeen, through Camp Quality and the research funding that we’re announcing again today. So, I’d like to now introduce Bill Shorten, and I’ll talk to you soon.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Brian Owler, Labor’s candidate in Bennelong, and Catherine and I have both found Brian a great source of advice and insight about our cancer Medicare package and we look forward, if Catherine’s the Health Minister and I get elected, of using Brian’s skills in government. First of all can I just thank the Avner Institute. This is a very important visit. It’s important because it reminds us all, the marvellous travelling media gallery we’ve got with us and politicians like ourselves. Reminds us what this election’s really about. Nothing is more important than family and health care. Today we're announcing $125 million for more cancer research. We’re here at the Avner Institute as pancreatic cancer is such a challenging cancer. We’re here because we want to provide $20 million to help reinforce the marvellous work they’re doing here.
 
We’ve got the world’s best researchers. We should have the world’s best funded research. We should make sure we give the world’s best researchers the tools they need, to help beat cancer. I’ve found this morning’s visit quite moving. I got to talk to Susie, she’s just outstanding. She’s battling with a diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Strong, elegant, just determined and resilient. And as we were talking about the challenge of pancreatic cancer, it tends to put everything else back into perspective doesn’t it? She’s working in a residential renovation business, she’s very creative, does a lot of the design. And what happens is that when you get this diagnosis, all of a sudden the stuff which you normally worry about is far less stressful. It puts your priorities perhaps where they need to be. I was also talking with Paul. Would you believe that I actually ran into Paul when we were on holidays down on the south coast of NSW two summers ago? Paul perhaps wasn’t aware fully of my role as the Opposition Leader, but we had a good chat at the time and that’s fair enough. Got to work on that. But it was only a short time after that, that he got the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and his father passed from it 20 years earlier, and Paul made the comment to me that he was surprised how much things hadn’t changed. He’s got a 12 year old, a 13 year old, he’s got a 17 year old, he’s got children. This is the fight of your life. This is why we are so proud of pushing billions into helping the out of pocket costs of cancer. This is why we’re pushing hundreds of millions of dollars of that into public hospitals to reduce waiting lists. This is why we are putting money into research. You know, Mr Morrison and the government they love to say that I’m the enemy, and you know sometimes in politics we carry on too much against each other. I want to say today the government are not my enemy. Cancer is my enemy. What we want to do is fight cancer and do the very best we can. That’s why we’re making the choices we are, as we present our policies to the people. I’d now like to invite Catherine to talk further and we’ll hear from the Avner Institute as well.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks Bill and it’s terrific to be here with Bill and particularly with Brian Owler, my friend and who I am very much looking forward to as being a colleague. He’s someone whose advice I’ve relied on for many, many years and he will make a fantastic Member for Bennelong. We’re also here with Caroline, from the Avner Cancer Foundation. Pancreatic cancer is just one of those awful, awful cancers. There’s no good cancer, they’re all bad, but this is such a sneaky cancer. Some 3,200 people will be diagnosed, and only 10 per cent, or less than ten per cent of them survive after five years. It’s a cancer that hides. It’s a cancer that uses your own cells to actually hide from chemotherapy and it’s resistant to many of the new immunotherapy drugs and the standard treatments, and we’ve not had enough money in research. So I’m very proud as part of our $2.3 billion Medicare Cancer Plan, to be investing $125 million in addition to what comes out of the Medical Research Future Fund or the NHMRC, this is additional $125 million for cancer research. And $20 million to help the Avner Pancreatic Cancer Foundation to really start to turbocharge  research in this area, because these people, these beautiful people, Susie and Paul who we’ve met today and the many people I’ve know who have passed away with pancreatic cancer can’t wait. They need this research today. I’m really proud to introduce Caroline today who lost her beautiful husband Avner 10 years ago from pancreatic cancer, and she’s turned what has been a awful, awful family experience into trying to fight for the so many patients who we lose each year from pancreatic cancer. Caroline.
 
CAROLINE: Thank you all. Pancreatic cancer is a particularly horrific form of cancer. Less than ten per cent survive till five years, and for 80 per cent of patients diagnosed, they’ll be lucky to see 12 months. It is the cancer of our generation and it needs to be fixed. We can see from other forms of cancer such as breast cancer and prostate cancer that with research funding, those stats can change. Both those forms of cancer have five year survival rates of 90 per cent and higher. We know that this can also happen for pancreatic cancer. My husband Avner died in 2008. He was one of 3000 people who died back then, and every year since then, those similar kind of numbers have died. We really applaud and are so sincerely grateful for this great decision by the ALP to invest in pancreatic cancer research. I know that all the families I meet across the country who have been affected by it, who have lost loved ones in as soon as a few days will really be so thrilled that there’s finally some hope for the disease, and I’d just like to say a personal thank you for this decision. Thank you.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you. Are there questions? I’ll start on my left and work around but we’ll try and cover as many as we can.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten what do you make of Peter Dutton’s comments about Labor’s candidate in Dickson? Do you think he’s being deliberately provocative in suggesting that she’s using her disability as an excuse?
 
SHORTEN: I’ll certainly go to those remarks, but are there any questions on the cancer research announcement first? I mean, no but that’s cool if, I mean it’s pretty self-explanatory. If there aren’t?
 
JOURNALIST: Yes a question on cancer research spending. Mr Shorten you’re here with Brian Owler. In 2014 Brian Owler, speaking to health fund bosses, it’s reported said “seven per cent of procedures that were covered by health funds incurred out of pocket costs. So how many services incur this out of pocket cost? How bad is that problem of out of pocket costs? And do you expect Brian Owler to come into the Parliament for the Member of Bennelong given the swing that we saw at the by-election?
 
SHORTEN: Oh listen I think Brian is a very good candidate. How many seats in Australia have got a surgeon of his track record and his public policy leadership? Brian Owler's taking a significant financial hit, to run for Parliament, and that's his choice. But he's done a lot of good and we were just speaking to a lovely lady in there, Sharon, who's been working on the scanning machines for 45 years and she said to me that patients are going to be disappointed because he's done so much for them but Brian's willing to subject himself to this and all the other issues, Labor's very lucky at the moment we've got a very talented front bench, I promise you Catherine King will be an outstanding Minister for Health. We've got some very talented people running in hard seats, Brian Owler hasn't asked for the easy path through a safe Labor seat. Bennelong is a very difficult seat for Labor to win. But how lucky is my party that we're attracting people of his calibre, his knowledge. I think it speaks volumes for him, and perhaps even a little but for our united party, you know we're the party of unity but Brian can answer some of the more detailed questions in a moment but I want to go to this question. I've noticed it percolate through conservative blogs sites or other forms, you know, or some of the government ministers saying there's no problem with out of pocket expenses in cancer. If you believe that go and ask someone who's getting cancer treatment right now. We've set up a website in the last few days, just to ask people's stories. We've had hundreds of heart breaking stories. If the government is so out of touch that they think that there's no out of pocket problem with the treatment of cancer, I suggest they talk to people diagnosed with cancer. I met an amazing lady at the Royal Brisbane Hospital, seems a lifetime ago but it was Monday, Elaine, she's had a diagnosis, she's been battling cancer since 2011. Nothing has worked, she's had to go into the private system, get the cancer trials. She's a really warm lady, I would put to you that 100 per cent of you here would hope that she was your neighbour, she’s a lovely lady. She said to me, "Bill I think we're now down to ten per cent chance, we're going to try one more drug". But she just held my hand and she just said "what worries me is not what happens to me, it’s that my family will be left with a debt." And, you know, go and ask the number of people that have to access their superannuation just to pay for their cancer treatment bills. So listen, I think the government shouldn't be running this argument that everything's fine and dandy, because it's not. Yes the public system's excellent. But there are waiting lists, massive waiting times. And I want to give you, even I as a lay person have worked out this about cancer - you can't out-wait cancer. Cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor. There is a problem. Labor has deliberately made hard decisions, not totally popular with everyone, to say that you can't get a tax subsidy on your sixth property investment, but we are saying, "I would rather use taxpayer money to help Susie and Paul" - these are real people we're talking about. This isn't a theoretical debate or a Canberra game. Pancreatic cancer is a shocker. The Avner research, formed out of love, why shouldn't it have some government money? I don't know if you want to hear from Brian too on this question.
 
JOURNALIST: Just one question on that same speech...
 
SHORTEN: We'll get Brian, and then I'll come...
 
OWLER: Thanks. Look, that's a really good question, because it goes to a fundamental issue of a misunderstanding about how our healthcare system works. Because those issues around private health insurance don't apply to when people are having consultations in people's offices, or when they're having scans as outpatients. Private health insurance only applies to the procedures that you're actually having in hospital. When you have cancer, you're having scans every three months, often appointments much more frequently than that. And they are the costs that add up over time. So, when people start pushing this line about, "it's all covered, or your private health insurance covers it," it doesn't. Sure, a lot of people get their services for free in the public system, but many people choose the private system as well, and our healthcare system works best when both our public and our private systems are functioning well, they're well-funded and they're balanced.
 
JOURNALIST: Doctor Owler, just on that same speech, you're reported as saying, "we know that people will happily pay for cosmetic procedures but feel affronted if there's any cost associated with their cancer care." It appears that you took aim with people complaining about high medical gap care costs. Have you changed your mind on that sense?
 
OWLER: People are often, I think, not shocked, but they don't understand how the system works. So, we have a lot of people that do go out and are happy to pay $5,000 to have a cosmetic procedure. But they are sometimes quite shocked at the costs that are involved in their cancer treatment over time. And what this policy goes to, what Labor's Medicare Cancer Plan goes to, is addressing those issues. You know, the things that the Consumer Health Forum, the Breast Cancer Network of Australia, and a whole range of other groups have said, is that people are having difficulty dealing with the costs of cancer. And, in fact, the Consumer Health Forum's paper is titled Hear Our Pain. Well, Labor has listened. And we're addressing those issues around those costs of cancer care.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can I ask you about Israel Folau?
 
SHORTEN: You can in a moment. But I promised I would start here. Sorry. I'll come to you soon.
 
JOURNALIST: Thanks, Ali France and Peter Dutton - what's your response?
 
SHORTEN: Ali France, let's just get some background here, so we understand. I find Mr Dutton's comments disgusting. How you can launch a personal attack on a person who suffered an above-the-knee amputation trying to protect their child, and then say somehow they're exploiting that, you know, I just want to tell you what happened with Ali France. And she can say it better in her words. She was in a shopping centre. She's got her little four-year-old boy. An elderly driver lost control of their vehicle, smashed into them. She shielded her four-year-old, as any mother would do, and she took the full brunt of the collision. She suffered an amputation above her knee. And for people who are amputees above your knee, that is even more difficult in terms of recovery. For two and a half years, Ali France never walked. She was told she would never walk again. Now, she credits a fantastic surgeon. She credits fantastic technology. Two and a half years after she was told she would never walk again, she did. She's a very strong person. Of course, as you would know, though, you could imagine when you have, if you haven't been through it, or had a family member go through it, when you're an above-the-knee amputee, you can't just have a shower like anyone else, you can't just move around your kitchen. She's a strong woman, she walks a lot, she's out there every day. But what she had to do was modify her house, because it can be so draining sometimes, she uses a wheelchair in her house so she's got all her energy for outside the house. As anyone would know when you look at houses, very few of them have been built, designed for the use of older people, people with mobility problems, or, indeed, people with disabilities. She spent over $100,000 of her compensation money just getting the house she lives in. She doesn't own eight or nine houses, by the way. She just owns the house she lives in. She invested over $100,000 of her compensation money just to get that house right. She doesn't own eight or nine houses, by the way. She just owns the house she lives in. She invested over $100,000 to get that house right. She's a strong woman. And, by the way, she knows that Peter Dutton's making these comments because he's scared of her. What else could motivate it? She doesn't want people's sympathy. The idea, though, that any Australian with a disability would rather use their disability than not have the disability is a fiction. She never wanted the car crash. She never wanted the amputation. But she's a strong person. We want more diversity in our Parliament. So, why is it that the very - a mother who lost her leg protecting her child is now subject to a personal attack by a scared government minister? I think - I think that is disgusting. Now, I know the government boasts about, you know, going after Labor - don't they get it? This country is sick of that rubbish. I think Mr Morrison should make his colleague apologise. I also remind you that a week ago - it was a week ago today - the government announced the Disability Royal Commission. And their words were excellent words, beautiful rhetoric, soaring. They said, "We've got to have a culture of respect towards people with disability in this country." Well, that didn't last very long, did it? You know, so what we have here is Mr Dutton has insulted every Australian with a disability, and Mr Morrison has said, "That's OK." So, you know, Ali France is campaigning. She was at a railway station this morning. She understands - she can recognise fear in her competitor when we see this sort of base personal attack. But is this where the government's got to? That they're going to start saying a person is using their disability? Especially, all you had to do was get that 60-second back-story that I told you.
 
JOURNALIST: In regards to Israel Folau - and I appreciate many people will be repulsed by his comments, he has an implied right to practise a religion. He has an implied right to preach that religion. Why doesn't he have a right to put that on social media?
 
SHORTEN: I think, when you single out parts of the population with an offensive attack, I think the rugby authorities have acted in an appropriate manner. I don't really want to get into everything that's been said, but there is no freedom to perpetuate hateful speech. And, you know, some of the comments which have been seen are far closer to hateful than I think appropriate for what people should be doing on social media.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the government's released what it says is Treasury modelling, putting the cost of your tax measures and non-measures at $387 billion. What do you say the true figure is? And how do you explain the discrepancy, if there is one?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, I think this is a desperate government who are willing to lie about anything. I just want to go to what Senator Cormann said in Estimates. This is why we struggle to take the government seriously on their campaign of lies and untruths. Senator Cormann was asked - there was a Treasury person asked a question by one of our Labor senators, and it was about costings. And Senator Cormann said - these are his words, they're not mine - we'd better tell that Western Australian Minister that.
 
Senator Cormann said, "That is not the Treasury's job. The Treasury does not cost Labor's proposals." 20 February. Now, apparently, either he was lying then, or we're seeing lies now. The other thing is about this, the government insists on characterising us shutting down loopholes and unsustainable subsidies to the top end of town as taxes. Let me use an example. Accountants' exemption. What happens is, you can, if you're fortunate enough to have a million dollars to deduct, you get that million dollars, you get the accountant to look at the deductions, you can write off a million dollars of your tax - sweet.
 
Did you also know that in Australia that, if that accountant charges you $100,000, you can claim the cost of minimising your tax, even what you paid the accountant to do it? And if we are going to stop that loophole, that is not a new tax. That's cracking down on a loophole. This government have become so addicted to defending their mates at the top end of town, they no longer recognise the difference between a tax and just protecting a rort.
 
JOURNALIST: What do you say the total impact is then? Is it 387 or is it different?
 
SHORTEN: No, I'm not even buying into that debate, because it's a false debate. I'll use another example. This government I think from its propaganda is somehow saying that a tax cut in 2025 - which they haven't legislated - so, in other words, they're promising you something in 2025. We think there's a better way to do it, we don't agree with them. But it's not actually the law. They're now saying that, because we won't agree to something they haven't done in six years' time, that that is a tax increase on Australians. This is a fairytale. And I tell you - just hang on, Jono - to further answer your question, the reason why I don't even accept the basis of what they're saying, it’s this. We all know the government wants to run a scare campaign. They've run out of anything positive to say about anything or anything, haven’t they. So, they just want to scare everyone. The reality is this election is about choices. I choose to shut down loopholes, like that accountants’ exemption. I choose to support not giving a property investor a subsidy for their sixth house, and instead I choose to spend it on health care. But I want to remind Australians, who are getting - on day two of an increasingly rancorous political debate, Liberal, Labor, National, who do you believe, what’s going on, I just want to say to Australians, this election is about you, the people.
 
It's not about us. I want to say that whilst I disagree fundamentally with how this government's fluffed up the last - mucked up the last six years, their instability, costs of living, everything going up except your wages, their cuts to schools and hospitals, I don't see the government as my enemy. I see cancer as my enemy. I see as my enemy when people can't afford to see the doctor or get the treatment they want. And Australians, I think, want to hear more of that from our politicians.
 
JOURNALIST: Clearly, the Labor Party is going to collect far more revenue than the government does over the next four years, over the next ten years. Clearly that's part of your plan. Doesn't that not have some sort of economic impact which will affect ordinary people?
 
SHORTEN: It's clear that we want to spend more money on public schools. That will have an economic bonus. It is clear that we want to have universal kindergarten for all three and four-year-olds. Did you know Labor's policy is to provide 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year, to all three and four-year-olds? The dividend of that means that those kids, when they get that preschool, kindergarten education, are going to have a much better learning experience at school. The smartest countries in the world already do this.
 
What we choose to do is spend scarce and important taxpayer money on educating the kids, on decreasing the out-of-pocket costs of, you know, cancer treatment, rather than spend it on tax loopholes like deductions to accountants for $1 million, or property subsidies. The other one which is a big, you know, I go to now - just to help explain why we mean I don't accept their figures at all - is that at the moment in Australia, we give nearly $6 billion in tax credits to people who don't pay tax. This is called a gift. And it's a nearly $6 billion gift. And it's going to increase every year. So, when we say we're not going to give the gift anymore, that is not a tax increase. It's just a decision to improve the bottom line of the budget, it's a decision to fund our health care. One in two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer by the time they’re 85, the average life expectancy, one in two of us. And it’s expensive, and I just want to make sure that when you’re in the fight of your life we’re alongside you. You're next - and then yourself.

JOURNALIST: On the accountant’s exemption, Mr. Shorten - the tax commissioner last month said he was sceptical that most of the savings claimed weren't from managing tax affairs but were in fact from other deductions, are you 100 per cent confident that you will raise the $1.8 billion over the next decade that Labor wants to from closing this loophole?
 
SHORTEN: I'm 100 per cent confident, that Labor is right, to stop allowing people deduct hundreds of thousands of dollars off their tax for what they pay their accountant. Just hang on Rich - your question, but my answer. So I'm 100 per cent confident that what we can do, that this is a fairer system. Why should someone who pays a million dollars to their accountant, to minimize their tax for millions more - why should we pay for the double dip? I mean it's a sweet deal, it's not illegal, but enough's enough. How long does this go on before we say I'd rather fund the school where your kids go to, and I'd rather fund pancreatic cancer research?

JOURNALIST: But Mr Shorten -  But Mr Shorten I-

SHORTEN: Timmy - Richard, I've given you - we've got plenty of time, another 35 days for better or for worse - Tim and I'll come back.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison has accepted a challenge to debate you in Perth, I understand. One, could you give us a direct answer to the challenge to have a debate in Perth, two, more broadly could you tell us how many debates do you think we should have in this campaign, and what kind of conditions would you apply to the way they are conducted, where they're conducted, and when we'd see them?

SHORTEN: Well I'm going to be in Perth, and I'm more - I'm going to be at a town hall meeting talking to the people, and I'm more than happy if the other fellow comes along - ok, that's fine. Secondly, it's a shame that Mr Morrison, or the government I should say, just saw fit to have ten days of Parliament in eight months, cause isn't that where we do a lot of the debating? I'm certainly up to a couple of debates with him, certainly, but I want the people involved.
 
But what I'm going to do in this election, by all means, let's have a couple of debates, I think that's appropriate and conventional, but I just want to say to the Australian people in the next 35 days, we want to keep hearing from you, we want to talk our positive plans. This is a very clear choice. Everything in Australia is going up except your wages. We've seen cuts to schools and hospitals. When you go and see the doctor, in the fight of your life for cancer, the out of pocket costs can be horrendous for too many of our fellow Australians. This nation is sick and tired of rising energy prices, we're sick and tired of no real action on climate change. We've got solid plans which put working and middle class people at the centre of what we do, and we're going to talk about that, we're going to talk about how we're going to help the pensioners, we've got plans to help small business, we've got plans to help, of course, you know, our tax position - we're offering lower taxes for 3.6 million wage earners, and we're offering a better deal for small and medium sized businesses, when they invest more than $20,000 in new, depreciable productive equipment and capital expenditure, we're going to accelerate the depreciation.
 
Sorry, someone who hasn't asked a question first.

JOURNALIST: On treasury being used to cost Labor policies while the government is in government, and then those numbers subsequently being released during the caretaker period, is that something that Labor sees a problem with?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the politicisation of Treasury is a problem. I mean the current head of Treasury spent ten years working for Peter Costello, worked very closely with the current Prime Minister. I worry that we see the trashing of conventions in our Westminster system and an independent public service, so I do see problems with that. But that's okay, I expect in this election, the government's attack on Labor to get louder, shout-ier, more aggressive, and more exaggerated, I guess that's the price we pay when we have a government who's got nothing positive to say about the people.

Sorry, is there anyone who hasn't asked a question.

JOURNALIST: Yeah, just quickly: Are you at all concerned about the Real Estate Institute's active campaign to lose Labor votes in marginal seats over negative gearing?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the real estate agents, obviously, it's in their financial interests to keep taxpayer money flowing to their business model.
 
JOURNALIST: But they say - its going to create more instability in housing.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, no I'm telling you what's really going on. You've got to ask yourself, why are they campaigning? They're campaigning because they like to have people bidding for houses, who are getting a taxpayer - because the more people they have bidding for houses, the more they can charge their percentage on the sale. But this is what's really cute about what the real estate agents aren't telling people, or the institute, not each  - I don't hold each real estate agent responsible - this negative gearing relies on a principle that you invest in property, make a loss, and the government subsidizes you. I don't believe the Australian property market needs a taxpayer handout to make property worthwhile. In this suburb here, there's no new land. This argument that somehow, Moody's has forecast the property prices will rebound - this is a scare campaign by vested interests who love getting taxpayer money. But why should a nurse, or a truck driver, pay their taxes to Canberra to subsidise someone to buy their sixth property? You know, this Saturday, and I don't know if you'll have time when you're on the road, you go to a couple of auctions, and you will see couples, who've worked hard, they've got together their 20 per cent deposit, they're ready for the you know, fees and charges, and they'll just simply get out-bid. Under this government, property prices have fallen, but they take no responsibility for that. Under this government ho voted 26 times against a Banking Royal Commission, they let the banks run amok, now the regulators, you know, had a big reaction and are now all over the banks, the banks don't want to lend as much money - when does this government take responsibility for the shambles of the last six years?
 
JOURNALIST: It's one of your big ticket policies - can you tell us clearly what is the breakdown between new and existing properties and negative gearing? We haven't got a clear answer on that question.

SHORTEN: We think currently the vast majority of negative gearing subsidies, go to people who invest in existing housing. We would like to see that oriented towards new housing. So the other thing I should just make, ican't say this enough, because I'm not sure that some of the vested interests who love their government taxpayer subsidy to prop up their business model will tell you, our changes are not retrospective. Any Australian who invests up to the 31st of December 2019, under the current laws, they'll be negatively geared. It's not a retrospective change, and you can still do it for new housing.

Is there someone who hasn't asked a question?
 
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask about Julian Assange - should Australia be doing anything to stop his extradition to the United States, and what's your general reaction on his arrest?

SHORTEN: Well I don't know what's going on in the last seven years in the Ecuadorian Embassy, and I suspect, you know that'll come to light over coming days. He's an Australian, so therefore he's entitled to consular assistance, no more, no less, but he's certainly entitled to consular assistance, I noticed the government said the same thing.
 
JOURNALIST: ACOSS said they want to ramp up Newstart, you say we need it lifted - I know you're going to review it once you ‘re into government, but can you guarantee it'll remain the same level?
 
SHORTEN: We're not reviewing it - Newstart's too low. And we're not reviewing Newstart to keep it at such low levels, but we've got to get it right, you've got to see the interaction with the tax and transfer system. I mean, Newstart is just part of a broader problem. The problem in Australia is that everything's been going up except people's wages. We need to see that, and we're seeing a lot of people being left behind. This economy is not being managed in the interests of working and middle class people. Perhaps we can do one more question here, and then we'll move on, over to you.

JOURNALIST: So, on just what you said about Newstart then, are you suggesting that either way, whatever comes out of the review there will be some kind of increase of some sort?
 
SHORTEN: I think there has to be, but let’s see what happens with the review. I'd be amazed - we're not holding a review to lower it - we're not holding a review to forget about it like they did with the energy payment. But again, just to finish up, I would like to thank the Avner Institute for the work it's been doing. I want to thank, in particular though, Suzie and Paul. They just remind me of what's important. It was a good wake up call, when you get that diagnosis, you're going to worry less about your texts, and a little bit more about your family and what's important. I promise Australians, that during this election I'm going to do my very best to focus on you - that's why we are committed so heavily into revolutionising help with the cost of cancer. Thank you very much.

ENDS

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten is campaigning in Sydney this morning where he will reveal the latest details of the party's plans to cut cancer costs. He joins us from the Sydney Markets. Mr Shorten good morning to you.

SHORTEN: Good morning Michael.

JOURNALIST: Firstly, to the news of the morning, what is your response to the arrest of Julian Assange overnight?

SHORTEN: It will be a matter for the legal system to proceed, he should receive the support any other Australian citizens should receive, the matter is going before court so I don't think there is much more I can add.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of America confirming overnight that yes indeed it does want to extradite Julian Assange to the United States?

SHORTEN: I have only read what you read. Mr Assange is entitled to his day in court. I'm not going to pre-empt that.

JOURNALIST: Should the Australian Government, any Australian Government, Coalition or Labor seek to stop such move?

SHORTEN: I think he should receive consular assistance beyond that, I don't know all the facts of the matter and he should deserve the ability to be able to represent it in court which he will be.

JOURNALIST: You're campaigning in Western Sydney this morning, Bill Shorten, how worried are you about the prospects of the Labor Party not just in Western Sydney but in Sydney generally after the disastrous performance of state Labor in the recent NSW election?

SHORTEN: I think the state election had a range of state issues, there is always a lesson there and we're not complacent. What we are doing nationally is we're not relying on the fact we're the Government. They're divided, their third Prime Minister and 13th energy policy and a lot of the team are retiring and have given up. But we think it is a more important issue then just the Government. We want to outline a fair go plan for Australia, a positive vision for the nation. We want to re-win people's trust in the system and we are going to do that by focusing on families cost of living, the fact that everything in Australia is go up except your wages and we are going to really push hard on the fact that we want to have the world’s best health care Medicare system.

We have outlined an exciting vision to help people when they are in the fight of their lives by radically decreasing the out of pocket costs when you have got a diagnosis of cancer.  We want to re-invest in our three and four-year-old kindergarten, we want to make sure our schools are the best in the world, that they are properly funded.  Of course, 150,000 new apprenticeships and 250,000 university places.  The real issues affecting families, we want to pass on a better deal to the next generation than the one we inherited. That includes tackling lower energy prices, making them lower by reinvesting in renewables and taking real action on climate change.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister on the show half an hour ago released the Treasury costings pointing to $387 billion burden as the Coalition puts it of the Labor tax plan over the next decade. Can voters afford to elect the Labor Party?

SHORTEN: Listen, the Liberals are lying about taxes. Let's just call it as it is. I don't want to spend this election talking about them but let's go to it. What we call unsustainable subsidies for the top end of town and rorts for the multinationals they call tax increases if they want to fix it up. They have a different view. I want to use our taxes to invest the best schools in the world and invest in looking after our older Australians and invest in the best health care system in the world. I want to keep alive the dream, it is our Medicare card not our credit card that determines our health care in the country. That is our priority. This government is lying about taxes. What they do is they are just saying unsustainable subsidies and rorts and looking after the top end of town. They think that when you tackle that, that is increasing taxes.

JOURNALIST: It’s not the Government, it’s the Treasury figures. Are you saying the Treasury is lying? They are very similar to figures put out by Chris Bowen the Shadow Treasurer a few days ago.

SHORTEN: No. Let's go to one. One issue they say is terrible, the Government and Treasury and let's face it, these days quite often Treasury just says what the Government wants them to say but let's go further. One of the rorts we want to shut down, did you know that if you want to deduct millions off your tax, you get your accountant to do it. Did you know you can also claim as a tax deduction the hundreds of thousands dollars you give to your accountant to deduct millions out of the tax system, you can even claim what you pay the Government as a tax deduction. Most Australians won't access the system.

Why on earth is this Government defending the ability of the super wealthy to pay their accountants, to minimise their tax and then even claim the cost to pay their accountants. It is a sweet deal, but it has got to stop, this nation can’t just keep funnelling money out of the top end when we have got waiting lists in our hospitals, massive out of pockets for people who have been diagnosed with cancer. It’s about priorities, I'm for middle- and working-class people.

JOURNALIST: To another tax concession Labor is promising to wind back to some degree, negative gearing. The NAB has put out a report this week saying it expects house prices in Sydney to drop by 20 per cent before this fall is over from the peak in 2017. Does it give you any pause for thought regarding the winding back of negative gearing concessions?

SHORTEN: The fact that bank said this tells me a couple of things.  It tells me the biggest drop in housing prices has happened under the Coalition Government. I give points to the Coalition Government. They want to bag Labor for policies that are not even in when they are presiding over the drop-in prices right now. They were asleep at the wheel when the banks were carrying on like the rules didn't apply to them. Now they have got the regulators all over them, but the point is we have had a government that has presided over an unethical banking sector, remember they voted 26 times against the banking royal commission. When it comes to the housing market lets nail a couple of facts into the ground.

If you currently invest in negative gearing, under the current rules, it doesn't change. The changes are not retrospective. I will tell you what will happen on Saturday right around Sydney and Melbourne and the cities, you will have young couples who worked hard to get the deposit together, they have got to pay other costs and charges and they will be out bid by property investors who are getting tax support from the young couple and other taxpayers of Australia.

I want us to be a country where you can buy your first home, you don't need taxpayer money to buy your 10th home. It is a matter of priorities. We could use some of that money we are paying to the property developers to make sure we can help defray the cost of child care and reduce the number of age care places. It is a choices-based election, this country can't keep giving money to a few people and disadvantaging young people coming through.

JOURNALIST: Just about out of time so confirming there will be no change at all if you win government to the negative gearing plan?

SHORTEN: There will be no change to existing investors.

JOURNALIST: But no change to your future plan?

SHORTEN: No, that's right. Someone's got to have the courage to stand up for the next generation, that's what we will do.

JOURNALIST: Just wanted to confirm that. The CFMEU is asking all Queenslanders to sign a pledge to support the coal industry. Should they sign that?

SHORTEN: Listen, people ask politicians, they seek this campaigning. Our view on coal is clear. Let me restate it for the record: Coal and our gas are important industries going forward. They are important to our exports and that will be part of our energy mix, but I am going to take real action on climate change. This country has been broken politically for a decade because we haven't been able to move forward and take real action on climate change. The biggest reason why households this morning are paying higher energy bills is because there is no energy policy. Thirteen energy policies from the government we need real action to hand on a better deal to our kids and to reduce power prices for our family and our businesses.

JOURNALIST: Should the Labor MP's sign the pledge? Based on what you said?

SHORTEN: It is up to them.

JOURNALIST: Is the CFMEU bullying your Labor colleagues in Queensland?

SHORTEN: If you want to talk about bullying, how about that LNP trying to threaten Melissa Price's job?

JOURNALIST: I'm not talking about them, I am talking about the CFMEU. I am asking the question? Do you believe that union is bullying your QLD Labor colleagues?

SHORTEN: No, I’ll tell you what my Labor colleagues they are adults, they can sign or not. Doesn't change our policy and our policy is as simple as this, we get that fossil fuel and coal is important to export and power generation but I promise Australian who are fed up with the dysfunction and disunity of the Government on climate change we need to act. We need to embrace the future, renewable energy will help lower energy prices and that is the direction we are heading in. No pressure from the Government or conservative media is going to deter us. We're not going to sell-out our kids because we're afraid of the right wing of the Liberal Party.

JOURNALIST: We will have to leave it there, Bill Shorten thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Look forward to talking.

JOURNALIST: Hopefully many times over the course of the campaign.

SHORTEN: Hope so, see you.

SUBJECT/S: 2019 Election; Labor’s Fair Go Action plan;

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Now, the man who wants the top job, Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, is also in the Emerald City. He joins us now from the Sydney Markets at Homebush. Bill Shorten, good morning to you. You kicked off your pitch to voters yesterday in enemy territory, in the safe Liberal seat of Deakin. You must be very confident that you've got this election in the can?
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: No, Deb. It's great to be on your show this morning. As for where I campaign, I campaign over all of Australia because I think Australians are sick of politics as usual. I don't view Australia as Liberal or Labor, I just view it as Australia and we have all got the same challenges. Everything is going up except your wages. We have had six years of massive instability in the Government and people just want to see proper investment in their kids' education. Making sure that when you're sick it's your Medicare card, not your credit card that determines your level of health. They want action on climate change. So, we are about cost of living and that's why I started in a suburban backyard because that's where Australia is. It's the families around the dinner table wondering what the future is going to hold and how Labor can help them look after their family and their health.
 
KNIGHT: Well, the bookies are the best bet of how things are going to play out and your odds of winning are better than you'll get with Winx at the track tomorrow.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah well, there is a way to go, things close up. But what I'm going to do is focus on the people. I happened to catch the tail end of the other fellow's interview and it's all pretty negative, and I suppose if you've run out of ideas that's where you go. We have got a positive plan for the future of Australia. I think Australia is over the fact that we can't take action on climate change and that our energy prices have gone up. They want to hear what we are going to do to help get wages moving. They want to know we can properly fund our hospitals and our schools. And today, I've been at the market here at Flemington. This is a fantastic market. It is the centre of the cut-flower industry in Australia, Mother's Day is coming up, lots of growers and I've also been over to the growers shed with the fruit and veggies - a lot of small businesses here and I think they were interested to hear our ideas to help small business as opposed to big business.
 
JOURNALIST: Well, you are promising to make life easier for Australians, but new treasury costings which the Government has released show you'll hit households with $387 billion in extra taxes over the next decade. Do you really think voters will welcome paying $5,400 a year more in taxes under Labor than the Coalition? It is a potent argument.
 
SHORTEN: The Liberals are lying about tax. I don't want to talk too much about it. That's just a bucket of lies. Whenever Labor closes a tax loophole the Liberals call it a tax increase. Whenever we stop unsustainable subsidies –
 
JOURNALIST: Do you deny that these costings from Treasury are correct?
 
SHORTEN: They are not correct. There you go, short answer too.
 
JOURNALIST: So no validity at all, you won't be taxing more -
 
SHORTEN: Oh no. Listen, you and I know that, and more importantly Australians know, this is a Government who is going to run on fear and negativity. For me it's a choice. Do we want to spend tax subsidies giving property investors their tenth investment property or pay accountants a million dollars to minimise your tax and then let the very rich claim their payment they made to the accountant as well as minimising their tax, or do we want to spend the money on making sure that when you are in the fight of your life with the big C, cancer, that we help you with your out of pocket costs? It's a question of priorities. This government want to give away our taxes to the top end of town. We want to see taxes spent on education and hospitals. At the end of the day, Deb, we can over-complicate politics. It doesn't matter if you are in the market here, or on the farms where the produce is being grown or in the middle of our big cities, the mums and dads wondering what to do with their kids on school holidays, it's the same thing. It's about family and it’s about health. If your family is ok, and your health is ok then everything else is a possibility. So we are prioritising cost of living, health and education, lower energy bills and we are going to go forward on that, not tax cuts for the very well off.
 
JOURNALIST: A lot of retirees though, many of them who are on modest nest eggs are not millionaires, they’re worried about your changes to the franking credits. A lot of people who have got investment properties, a lot of them are not millionaires, are confused and concerned about your crack-down on negative gearing and capital gains tax. Will you be reviewing any of these policies, particularly the property ones in light of the fact we have seen the housing market really go downhill since you released that policy?
 
SHORTEN: Let's go to the heart of the matter, I'll try and answer it as quickly as the time will permit. But on property, let's not be confused. If you invest, if you negatively gear currently under the existing rules, for your investment that you've already made, it won't change. So actually no-one who is negatively gearing is affected. But going forward, we can't keep handing away billions of dollars to fortunate property investors, many of who are buying their fifth or tenth property when our schools and our hospitals are not properly funded, when we have got waiting lists for basic surgery, lifesaving surgery. So it's not retrospective the changes, and also going forward, you'll still be able to negatively gear for new housing. In terms of the rest of the propositions, I'll put it as simply as this: our tax system is making it harder for our young ones, our millennials, the younger people to be able to even buy their first home. We have got to start creating a level playing field. I want to keep alive the dream of owning your first home, not being able to property invest in your tenth home.
 
KNIGHT: Alright, Bill Shorten, we thank you for your time this morning. There's five weeks of this. We look forward to chatting to you during the course of the campaign. Thanks again.
 
SHORTEN: Cheerio, bye-bye.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. Great to be here in Mitcham with Shireen Morris, and of course my remarkable Deputy, Tanya Plibersek.
 
The election has been called and today the case to vote Labor is that we will deliver more jobs, better health and education. Take real action on climate change and renewable energy and help push energy prices down. We'll get on top of cost of living burdens and we'll get wages moving again in this country. And, we can manage the economy in the interests of working and middle-class people because my team is united.
 
Australians face a real and vital choice at this election. Do you want Labor's energy versus the Government's tiredness? Labor's focus on the future versus being stuck in the past? Labor's positive plan for all Australians or a negative fear campaign from the other side? Do you want a united government under Labor or another three years of division following the last six years of division under the current Government.

So these are important choices; energy, positive, future focused and united. You know, my political philosophy is very straight forward. What we believe in, is making sure that the economy works in the interests of working and middle-class people. When everyday Australians are getting a fair go, then this economy hums. We get good jobs, not just casualised labour hire, part-time jobs.

We want to see the cost of living genuinely tackled. The biggest problem in Australia right now, is that everything is going up except people's wages. We also want to make sure that women get a fair go in our society. You know, we can over-complicate politics sometimes. Politics is about people and it's about family and it's about health. What Labor wants to do is we understand that Australians want to hand on a better deal to the generation to come after them, than the one they inherited.

That's why we're going to hand on a better deal with a world-class education system. From pre-school to schools to TAFE - 150,000 places - to universities. And we want to hand on a better environment than the one we currently have by taking real action on climate change. We want to make sure that we hand on a better deal to our kids when it comes for them to be able to afford to buy their first home, rather than favouring property investors buying their fifth or sixth property.
 
And of course, there's no issue any more important to Australians than their health. If your family's health is okay and your health is okay then everything else is possible. If you've got a challenge with your health then everything else tends to take second place.

That's why Labor believes so much in our Medicare system. We don't just want to have the world's best system of healthcare, we want to keep it the world's best system. What we want to do is invest in our hospitals and reverse the cuts. We want to make sure that our frontline of healthcare services, our GPs are properly resourced. We want to make sure that people who suffer from mental health illness that they get the support they require. We want to make sure that our age care system is genuinely looking after people as they grow older.
 
And of course, when it comes to health, there's no bigger battle than when you or a beloved one receives a diagnosis of cancer. Cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor. That's why Labor has a vision to walk alongside people when they are in the terrifying battle of their lives. People shouldn't be drowning in thousands and thousands of out-of-pocket costs merely because a government doesn't properly fund cancer Medicare. So when you look at Labor's vision for Australia, it's an inclusive vision, we can deliver an inclusive vision which tackles inequality, which makes sure that your postcode or how much money you have in the bank doesn't become the sole predictor of how you fare in life.

We want the very best for this generation and the next generation and we can deliver this because we've done the work. I think even our harshest critics would concede that we've been united for the last six years and that's what the Australian people want. They want one Prime Minister for three years, they don't want a revolving door of politicians being consumed by themselves. For me this election is very straightforward, it's a choice about being stuck in the past or a brighter future.

It's about having a positive view of what Australians can do together rather than a negative view telling us to be afraid of each other. It's about handing on a better deal for the future, than the one that we've inherited from the past. The last six years hasn't been Australia's finest six years, there's been instability, growing inequality, there's been wages stagnation, everything going up but your wages, energy prices up, the cost of going to see the doctor or seeing a specialist, the cost has gone up. What we need to do is make sure that this country is working in the interests of everyone, not just the top end of town.

We've made serious reform decisions, to make sure that multinationals pay their fair share of tax. Australians are sick and tired of the big companies doing better and better and better, treating tax as an option, whereas everyday small businesses and medium-sized businesses or pay as you go tax payers, they just got to pay what they're meant to pay and they don't have the option - they don't have the choice of opting out of our tax system.
 
Australia is a great country and we can make it an even greater country, if we make sure that no one gets left behind. This election is about you, the Australian people, it's about you, your family, your health. Labor has got a plan because we're united, we have a vision and we've got a talented team. If you are dissatisfied with the last six years, if you want better than the last six years, if you want a fair go for all Australians, if you want a government who is united and not constantly trying to tear each other down, then vote Labor on May 18.

Thank you very much.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you've arrived at a seat with a margin of 6.4 per cent, that suggests that you see yourself as a clear front runner, is that how you see it?

SHORTEN: Not at all, what this suggests is that I get what's going on in Australian families. We have made a conscious decision to start the 2019 campaign in the family lounge-room of an everyday Australian family; two kids, two marvellous handsome little boys going to the local public school, both parents are working. They're not complaining, they know this is a good country, they're paying off their mortgage. They're doing everything they can do to provide the best opportunity for their kids.

But this election isn't about the personalities, it can't be about the back-biting and the division. You know what people hate about politics? It's that too many politicians are consumed by themselves, too puffed up about their own identities and they're not thinking enough about the people.

This election is about the people of Australia; it's about the cost of living, it's about wages stagnation, it's about doing something about energy prices, it's about making sure that we hand on a better deal to our kids when it comes to climate change. It's about education, every parent in Australia, every aunt and uncle, every neighbour works hard and they want to make sure the kids get the best start. That's why we want to properly fund our public schools. And of course, this election is about health care. Do you know, we over-complicate politics sometimes - that's all of us; the politicians, the media. What we need to understand is what matters to millions of our fellow Australians is their family and their health.
 
Labor's got a plan to tackle the cost of living. We've got a plan to get wages moving again. We've got a plan to take real action on climate change which will lead to great investment in renewables and downward pressure on power prices. We've got a plan for the health care system of Australia. I couldn't be prouder of my united Labor team when we outlined our vision to walk alongside people in the terrifying battle against cancer. One in two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer. Cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor. We are going to deliberately put much more money than ever before into our health system rather than sustain unsustainable tax subsidies to the fortunate few.

It's all about choices this election. I choose better treatment for cancer and cheaper treatment for cancer than bigger tax loopholes for multinationals or more unsustainable tax subsidies for the fortunate few. It's all about choices. That's why we are here in middle east-suburb of Melbourne, Mitcham with a family who are fair dinkum because this is who this election is about. It's about Jacqui and Richard Davis and their boys.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, will this family be affected by Labor's negative gearing policy?

SHORTEN: No. And let's also be clear: anyone who currently invests in property and they make a loss and get tax subsidy paid for by everybody else, they're the current tax rules - the changes will not affect them. Our changes are prospective.

But I tell you how this family will be positively affected by us reforming the tax system, by us deciding that a person buying their tenth house is not more important than a first home-buyer. And it will affect this family positively: there will be more money for their children's education, there will be more money when their children are sick and need to go to the hospital, there will be more support for their parents in aged-care, there will be more support in the community to make sure we can help put downward pressure on energy by investing in renewables. It's all about a choice. The Government choose to defend tooth and nail, to the very bitter end, people who can afford to buy 10 properties and claim a subsidy from the Government.  I chose to fight for the future, I choose to fight for families, I choose to fight for cost of living.  My feet are firmly planted in the backyard of a Mitcham house because I understand that politics should be about the people, it’s about the cost of living, education, health, good jobs, renewable energy.
 
JOURNALIST: It was reported today…
 
SHORTEN: I might just, I want to share a couple more questions and then we will finish up for this one, we will have plenty of time to chat with us on the campaign.
 
JOURNALIST: It was reported today that Queensland MPs were gagged from talking to the media about Adani, would you pledge to enable them to have a full and frank debate about the mine?
 
SHORTEN: I think we need to be full and frank about the mine, that's why I don't think it’s any particular coincidence that the Government went to the Governor General today on the day they were going to the CSIRO was going to be examined about its report into the Adani mine.

You want to talk about gagging? What a coincidence the Government rather than facing the scrutiny of Parliament about the fairly politicised and bullying process of mine approvals has instead decided that today they want to have the election, that is what it is. The Labor party's united, if you want to look at disunity look at the current Government, I don't want to spend today actually talking about the current Government too much. My people are free to speak that's not the problem. The real issue is, do you want united government in the future? One comment I got right across the summer, people would come up to you and say "I have been a lifelong Liberal, like some of your policies, don't like others, but I'm contemplating voting for Labor this time, because the current Government just can’t get over the fact they all hate each other".

People are sick of politics as usual, my challenge, and your earlier question I will finish on this note.  You said: "is Labor the front runner?"  We are competitive but my obligation and my pressure I don't feel comes from the Government so much as fulfilling the faith of the people.  A lot of Australians think the system is broken. They think it is all just a fix and everyone is in it for themselves. I and my team and the remarkable, Tanya Plibersek and the rest of my colleagues, and Shireen running in Deakin, Shireen Morris, running in Deakin. We are motivated by a better future for Australia. We are hungry to do the best we can for the country. I can’t guarantee voters that Labor will be successful, that’s is in the hands of the people. But I can guarantee the Australian people I am going to work my very hardest in the next 37 days as I have for the last 2000-plus days to organise proper ideas, to put a plan of social and economic improvement in front of Australian people, I think Australians deserve better than the last six years of politics and I'm prepared to offer them that vision.
 
Thank you everybody and see you on the trail.

JUSTINE ELLIOT MP, MEMBER FOR RICHMOND: Good morning everyone, I'm Justine Elliot, member for Richmond. I'm very pleased to have here today Bill Shorten, Labor leader. We have also got Catherine King here, our Shadow Minister for Health, and also NSW Senator Kristina Keneally here as well, there she is. We have also got Patrick Deegan here, our candidate for Page. First of all, can I say how great it is to have Bill Shorten back here on the North Coast. Bill's been here many times, and he understands the people of the North Coast, he understands our issues. So, welcome back Bill, great to have you here. It's also great to have Bill here making a number of really important announcements. Of course, these announcements are part of our $2.3 billion Cancer Care Package. This is a huge investment, indeed, the largest investment in cancer care in Australia's history. It'll make a huge difference for the people of the North Coast in terms of actually being able to access affordable treatments, diagnoses, when they do have cancer. So, thank you so much Bill for coming up today and making these important announcements, and I'll now hand over to Bill.
 
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Justine. It's great to be back in Ballina, great to be back on the North Coast for Patrick and Justine, Labor's North Coast team for the federal election. I'd like to acknowledge North Coast Radiology for hosting us at the visit. But in particular, before I get into our exciting announcement, I just want to thank Carolyn and Marilyn for taking the time to tell me about their stories.
 
You know, talking to them reminds me of what really matters in politics, very clearly. Politics is about your family and your health. If your family is okay and your health is okay, then you have got all the choices in the world, and all the dreams and thoughts. But if you get a diagnosis of cancer, then all of a sudden, that is terrifying. When I meet Carolyn and Marilyn, I just realise how strong they are. They didn't choose to be strong, they had to be strong. When they tell me that lung cancer can be a very lonely, lonely fight, what they're reminding me of is that there's no good cancer, there's just bad cancer. And lung cancer sufferers suffer a stigma, perhaps unlike other cancers, and I promised Marilyn that I'd say this before I made our announcement. Marilyn, and to all of those Australians who live with lung cancer, it doesn't matter how you got the lung cancer, if it was smoking or if it was through other circumstances.

Not all lung cancer is caused by smoking, but even if lung cancer is caused by smoking, I'm telling you now, when I talk to you, I just see someone who has lung cancer. We make no judgements, but we do recognise that people with lung cancer have perhaps been stigmatised in the more general fight against cancer and today this announcement is not just about our general fight against cancer, and I want to help people with less waiting periods, with making sure that we help people with their out-of-pockets. I just want to say to every Australian who's had a diagnosis of lung cancer, and to every Australian family member of someone with a diagnosis of lung cancer, that Labor understands your particular challenge.
 
Today, Labor is putting forward over $63 million to help in the fight against lung cancer. This builds upon our multi-billion dollar war chest to help people deal with the out-of-pocket costs of fighting cancer. To help with making sure they can get the scans, and the specialist's advice in a timely fashion to reduce waiting lists, to make sure that people in regional Australia are not treated as second class in the fight against cancer because they don't have access to the same resources and quality treatment as people in the cities do.
 
But today's lung cancer package is also about the future. It's about making sure we discourage our young people, the next generation, from taking up smoking. We would like to get rates of lung cancer, and smoking rates, down below 10 per cent. Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death, and we want to change that.
 
Now, we will back in the research and will back in the other measures, but lung cancer has perhaps been neglected, and what we want to do is help people in the fight against lung cancer. But also, we do want to discourage the younger generations from taking up smoking. That's why it’s particularly good to be here with the Tobacco-Free Portfolio push, we are going to provide some money to help the campaign, and we will hear from the remarkable campaigners in a moment. We want to make sure that we discourage investment in tobacco-related companies, so that we can help put downward pressure on the smoking rates.
 
Listen, that's enough from me, but I would like now to invite Catherine and some of her guest speakers to talk about some of our exciting initiatives to talk about the scourge of lung cancer.
 
CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH MEMBER FOR BALLARAT: Thanks Bill. Well some 13,000 people were diagnosed with lung cancer last year, and every year 10,000 die. We know that tobacco smoking is one of the leading causes of lung cancer, but we also know that one in five people who get lung cancer have never smoked. Think about it, those of us in our fifties, we think about sitting in our car with our parents smoking away. You think about the carcinogenic exposure through all sorts of occupations that we have seen. Lung cancer has many causes, but it also has a substantial stigma and we want to call that out today.
 
This package that we are announcing today is comprised of $40 million dollars to restart the national tobacco campaign. We haven't had a national tobacco campaign for five and a half-years, since Labor was last in office. We need that campaign to stop encouraging young people from taking up smoking, and that people are absolutely aware that cigarettes do damage. Every cigarette does damage. We're also announcing support services for people with lung cancer. There are only seven lung cancer nurses across the country supporting over 3500 lung cancer patients. We want to increase the number by another 20 lung cancer nurses, and I want to recognise the Lung Foundation who is here with us today alongside two very beautiful patients that we've heard from today. We are also going to support Bronwyn King's Tobacco-Free Portfolio. Bronwyn was an oncologist at the Peter Mac in Melbourne, and discovered that her superannuation, part of it, was invested in tobacco shares, and wanted to do something about it. She's taken this program, the divestment of superannuation and other investment portfolios from tobacco internationally, and she's been speaking with the World Health Organisation. We want to support this great Australian in getting tobacco funding out of our superannuation. We also want to have an awareness campaign - we are seeing an emergence of lung disease happening in occupations where we thought we had long, long eliminated it. Young people, we had a young 36 year-old die in Queensland just recently who had been cutting concrete for many of our kitchens and benches that we have. We are seeing way too many young Australians begin to get lung disease. We are also going to be focusing on stigma and making sure people understand what happens. The fact that we haven't seen a national campaign for a long period - for five and a half-years - you have to question it. This is a government that still has the National Party taking tobacco donations. Scott Morrison has to step up today and say to his Coalition partners: enough. It took $56,000 from tobacco companies last year, and Phillip Morris is the second largest donor to the National Party. This is absolutely inexcusable, and Morrison has to get behind this campaign and get behind calling his National Party colleagues out and getting rid of their addiction to tobacco donations once and for all. I'm going to hand over to Sanchia Aranda, who's from the Cancer Council, who's going to speak a little bit about the importance of this announcement, and our broader cancer package, and Bronwyn King, from Tobacco-Free Portfolios, will also talk a little bit about her work.
 
SANCHIA ARANDA, CEO OF THE CANCER COUNCIL: Thank you. I'd like to start by calling out how fantastic it is to see cancer put at the forefront through the Labor Party's announcements over the last week. We are excited by the opportunities to really focus on reducing any inequalities in cancer outcomes. We know that the poorest people in our community have 37 per cent higher age-standardised mortality rate from cancer than the wealthiest and that is just not acceptable and so we are absolutely delighted by some of these announcement. In relation to the announcements made today specifically around lung cancer, we absolutely recognise the stigma associated with lung cancer, and in fact with several cancers, but this important campaign shows that it doesn't matter how you get cancer, but actually you deserve the all best treatment that the world can offer, and the best chance of survival regardless of your circumstances. In terms of the money for the national tobacco campaign, this is the first major investment announcement since 1997. In the 1997 campaign, a $9 million investment saved 55,000 lives, and also saved over $700 million in costs across the health and welfare system. So we need to see investment in anti-tobacco as really, really important. What's really important about this is that we know that two things drive down smoking rates. One is taxation, and the other is health messaging. All the national surveys show that at the moment, taxational price is the only driver and that the health driver is falling way behind other drivers of quitting smoking and the end result of that is a slowing in the rate of reduction of tobacco smoking in this country. And so this investment will go a long way to ensuring not only do our young people not take up smoking because of health messaging but that those people who are already addicted and have fallen fowl of the tobacco industry’s terrible attempts to get us all addicted to nicotine are protected from that and given the opportunity to quit. So, thank you to the Labor Party for making these announcements and we look forward tobacco control and prevention at the heart of this next election process. So thank you very much.
 
DR BRONWYN KING FOUNDER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER  TOBACCO FREE PORTFOLIOS: So thank you very much, my name is Dr Bronwyn King, I'm a radiation oncologist and the CEO of Tobacco Free Portfolios, at Tobacco Free Portfolios we are thrilled to hear of Labor's commitment to our work. For many years we've been very busy trying to build a bridge between the finance sector and the health sector on the issue of tobacco. It makes absolutely no sense for Australians to lead the world in the fight against tobacco yet finance tobacco on the other hand, and we will use this funding from a Labor Government to increase our work to escalate our impact and to make sure that no Australian is inadvertently supporting the tobacco industry through their superannuation fund, through their bank or through their insurers. So we're very happy to be here today, we really want to warmly welcome this commitment and we very much support the Labor Government's commitment to all patients who have cancer including those who suffer terribly from lung cancer. Thank you.
 
SHORTEN: Catherine has got one more exciting announcement for the North Coast today, our radiation centres.
 
KING: Also meant to mention that very importantly, one of the initiatives we have announced is thirteen radiation therapy centres across the community, two of which will be located in these communities represented by Patrick, hopefully by Patrick and also by Justine. For Far North New South Wales there will be one located in Far North New South Wales and another centre will be located in Grafton. We know that only one in three people who are recommended for radiation therapy in Australia actually get access to it. Wherein comparable countries it is one in two, we know that there are some 13,000 or 15 per cent recommended for radiation therapy don't actually get access and part of that is because it’s just too far for many people to travel to get access to that radiation therapy, and of course cost is another factor. So these will be very important radiation therapy centres here in the communities along the New South Wales coast.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions on the lung cancer and radiation therapy announcements and then I'm happy to go to other issues?
 
JOURNALIST: Exactly where in the Richmond seat will this radiation centre be?
 
SHORTEN: I'll let Catherine answer that.
 
KING: Thank you. Thanks for that. We'll have to go through a process to determine the exact location but obviously it would either be Ballina or Byron are the two logical locations for this centre.
 
SHORTEN: Any other questions about our fight against cancer and helping people with their out of pocket costs?
 
JOURNALIST: While this will help access for a lot of people, there will still be some people left in the lurch and some of the biggest costs are the travel costs for regional patients, is Labor going to do anything about that?
 
SHORTEN: And I acknowledge that there are travel costs, the best way we're tackling that is we're bringing in the services to the people. Right now people have to travel vast distances, I've just been in Queensland, people have to frequently go to Brisbane to get timely attention, same in regional New South Wales, Victoria, all parts of Australia. So our 13 radiation treatment centres is I think a game changer in terms of being able to provide services. Yesterday we announce $500 million to help our public hospitals that will help reduce the waiting lists for cancer treatment. I don't know if you know but 83 per cent of our fellow Australians who get a positive result out of the government bowel screening tests have to wait beyond the recommended period to actually get treatment. So our public system is spectacular but we ask them to do a great deal with not enough, our staff are fantastic - they do a great job. So we're putting in $500 million, much of that will go to regional hospitals, to be able to provide it. We were in Rockhampton, sorry Gladstone, in Gladstone hospital yesterday – I was also in Rockhampton. What it means by providing assistance with some of this money is that 3000 people live in Gladstone won't have to travel to Rocky or Brisbane to get treatment. So I think one of the best ways we help defray travel costs is to invest in the regions. You know our Medicare cancer plan is actually a regional Australia health plan. Too often the results in regional Australia in terms of fighting cancer are unacceptable. And there's one reason. Because the services aren't close enough to home. Or they're too expensive or the waiting lists are too long. If there are no other questions I'm happy to go to other matters.
 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten in regards to the fish kill report do you think the Government's response will be enough to prevent a future fish kill?
 
SHORTEN: This government - too little too late. We've got a government in denial about the impact of climate change, we've got a government that is basically letting Australia's largest river system die because they have not allowed enough flow of water from the north to south. This is what happens when you get a crony government who just focuses on one part of the river system and not the rest. So, does anyone think if there was no election the government would have even done this? Labor commissioned the Australian Academy of Science, a peak body of scientists in Australia and they made it very clear that climate change and river flow are the reasons why we are getting unprecedented fish kills. Don't believe the people who say this is always what happens. It is not. This is part of the greater problem of climate change in this country. This government is simply a broken government because they can’t agree on taking action on climate change. We are handing on a more damaged planet to the next generation because this government can't make a decision on climate. I don't know how many of you here have had the chance to see an extraordinary intervention from a group of people who don't normally intrude in the political debate. No less than 23 former fire chiefs, leading experts. the firefighters the front line. the people who we count upon to keep us safe and to protect our property and farms. Twenty-three former fire chiefs today have issued an extraordinary intervention, they have said that the Morrison Government, the LNP Government are not doing enough on climate change. So this government, you know they ignore the scientists they ignore the parents they ignore the environmentalists they ignore the evidence. But how can the Morison Government keep ignoring firefighters? How can we be in a situation where we ask our firefighters to go on the front line to deal with the catastrophic effects of climate change yet not do the policies which will actually make their job easier, which can prevent future expansion of natural disasters? I am pleased to say that my emergency services Attorney General Mark Dreyfus is meeting with the firefighters, with the experts today in Melbourne. I will certainly be meeting with them in the near future. This government, this election, one of the issues that's going to be a referendum on is that we want real action on climate change. This government so far gives you no cause for any optimism that a vote for Liberals will be anything other than a vote for the same inaction, chaos and division on climate.
 
JOURNALIST: Yesterday your shadow Attorney General said Peter Dutton has some questions to answer over cash for access meetings with Mr Huang. Do you have any questions to answer about your own $55,000 paid meeting with the same Chinese donor in 2015. Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
 
SHORTEN: I didn’t catch that last bit?
 
JOURNALIST: Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, we have said that we should not have foreign donations in our system. So the matters to which you refer have already been previously canvassed in the media. I understand the Government wanting to repeat old news to distract from their own problems but Labor took, we imposed a voluntary ban on ourselves not to take foreign donations long before the law caught up with it. We asked the Government, The Liberals and Nationals to do the same thing but they didn’t. They love that money. They did not want to stop it flowing. Now foreign donations have been banned two years later and I am pleased. In terms of the issue arising out of what happened yesterday and the reportage on Monday night, what we see as a business model of the Liberal Party where powerful Liberal lobbyists pocket tens of thousands of dollars for organising meetings with their mates in the government. This is a very bad look. But that almost, believe it or not, that is not the key issue, as bad as that is. What the real problem is that you have the former Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, he has been the chair of the National Security Committee. He is the leading spokesperson for three years on the national security of the nation. He has blown the whistle on these revelations. Not the ones which were already out there in the public domain, he has blown the whistle on revelations about this and he has said that Mr Morrison needs to explain this conduct and he has said that you can’t wipe it under the carpet, you can't brush it off as gossip. What we have is the former Liberal Prime Minister accusing the current Government of not dealing with an issue and doesn’t that just highlight again the complete division and dysfunction in the Government? Australians are sick of the infighting of the Liberals, especially when it comes to national security.

JOURNALIST: What about your meeting though, what was discussed there, what commitments were made?

SHORTEN: We have had plenty of meetings with all sorts of people we always talk about foreign policy; you can talk about domestic policy. But one thing is for sure. Any donation that was given to Labor and I thought, to the Liberals, is always disclosed. You might not be aware but Labor has a self-imposed standard that if anyone wants to make a donation above $1000 it has to be disclosed. What we have seen here on Monday is a revelation that senior Liberal powerbrokers are pocketing money for themselves, not even their Party, they're pocketing money for themselves, providing cash for access. But I think, what has compounded the problems for the current Government is that the former Prime Minister, the man who the Liberal Party said we should all vote for in 2016, a man who they said we should vote for at the last election has now blown the whistle on the conduct of the current Prime Minister and his Senior Ministers. How much division under the current Government is this nation have to put up with before this current Government realises they can't just cover up these matters and what they have to do is focus on the national interest of the people rather than their own infighting?
 
JOURNALIST: Is it hypocritical to be criticising Peter Dutton given your own links?

SHORTEN: We have made very clear about donations. The issue here is that it's not me saying that Mr Morrison is wiping this under the carpet, it's Malcolm Turnbull.  What is going on with these Liberals? They are shaking hands and best mates last year. No-one can forget the footage of Barnaby Joyce and Malcolm Turnbull after the New England by-election. Mr Morrison putting his arm around Malcolm Turnbull in August of last year saying that Mr Morrison was ambitious for Mr Turnbull. But because all of a sudden they are so bitter with hate, anything Malcolm Turnbull says is apparently wrong according to Mr Morrison. This is not the way to run the national security of the nation. This is not the way to run the Government of the nation. A party that can't govern itself can't govern the nation. And it is not me saying this, Malcolm Turnbull is criticising this current crew but the people of Australia are fed up with a lot of them.
 
JOURNALIST: Why aren't you marching in the Change the Rules rallies today?

SHORTEN: Because I'm here.
 
JOURNALIST:  If you were in Melbourne would you be marching alongside (inaudible)?
 
SHORTEN: I am not in Melbourne and the point about it is that is, two or three things. One is I am very, very, very proud of the fact that Labor is enunciating a plan to help Australians in the fight of their lives. We over complicate politics sometimes, it is all about the ‘gotcha’ and the division and the personalities. When you strip away the rubbish and the noise and all the coverage of politics, what really matters is your family and your health. I feel privileged to have spoken to Carolyn and Marliyn today. Both these women are very strong. They have had the shock of their lives cancer is not a journey, it is an ordeal, hell, it’s terrifying. I could not be more excited, frankly, about what we are outlining because I realise that what we are doing is going to make a real difference. Forget the noise. Even in this press conference here, even if you did a survey on the street here, one in every two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer in their life and ask anyone in the street here do they know a family touched by cancer, yes, they do. And we know that the system, as good as it is, is not good enough. The reality is that if you go through the public system, there are waiting times. Great staff, great work but there are waiting times and there are out-of-pocket costs. And a lot of people have to move between the public and the private systems. I think it is a shock to a lot of people before they get that diagnosis of cancer. That not only does cancer make you sick but it can make you poor. The strategy for fighting cancer is to not out wait it on a waiting list to get a life-saving treatment or scan. That is why I am here today.

In terms of what people are saying about wages policy, I understand the frustration of millions of Australian wage earners who are frustrated with the fact that everything is going up except their wages. I mean your electricity bills have gone up 15- 20 per cent under this government in recent years. If you are a small business your energy bills have gone up and up. Your out of pocket to see a GP that’s up 20 per cent. Your out-of-pocket to see a specialist up nearly 40 per cent. There is no action in terms of wages. If you work in hospitality and retail your penalty rates have been cut. Women in industries where they predominantly employee women like early childhood education get paid less than the men do in comparable industries. No wonder people are frustrated with the current system.
 
JOURNALIST: You have set a target of 50 per cent of new car sales being electric by 2030. Have you set a target for how many of them to be built in Australia?
 
SHORTEN: I have noticed that this government, they are so addicted to scare campaigns they ever want to scare you about their own policies because there are a lot of similarities between our policy and that of the Government. I will hand over to a Senator who could host her own motoring show she is that expert on electric vehicles. But the point about it in all seriousness is this, we must have one of the few governments in the world who has not read about the future of electric vehicles. The reality is that all of the big car companies around the world are moving to producing electric vehicles. What we want to do is make sure that Australia is in that debate. We're giving Australians choice for cheaper vehicles powered by electricity. It is very clear and all experts have said that electric vehicles over time over time are going to decrease the cost of owning a car. But we need to send a signal to the world to start selling us cheaper versions of electric vehicles. We want to be a nation that manufactures here, never let us forget that under the current Liberal National Government we lost the car industry. We lost tens of thousands of jobs. Other first world countries are manufacturing cars but our short sighted luddites gave up manufacturing cars in Australia but under us it is going to be different. We have a three word slogan for Australia. It is called made in Australia. So we are going to fund this advanced manufacturing future fund and if electric vehicles are part of a manufacturing future we're going to provide them cheap finance. I would like to see us make electric cars in Australia because Australians are top-class manufacturers when you have a government who supports them. Speaking of electric vehicles let me hand over to the expert.
 
KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: Thank you Bill. To listen to Prime Minister Scott Morrison you would think that the Labor Party was going to sneak into your house on the January 1st 2030 and steal your car keys and deny you any fun on the weekend, towing your boat or driving your Hilux. I know it is only Wednesday and I hate to ruin the Prime Minister’s weekend but Toyota has announced today that they will be making all their vehicles electric including the Hilux within six years. So sorry Prime Minister if you want to drive a Hilux in about six years’ time it is going to be electric. Scott Morrison also said that electric vehicles can't tow a boat. I don't know what kind of boat Liberal MPs get around in maybe it is a superyacht, it's got to be the size I guess that is larger than a plane because there is the point in which an electric vehicle towed a Qantas jet just recently at Melbourne Airport. Maybe the Prime Minister wants to check that out on YouTube.
 
This Government doesn't know if they are coming or going on electric vehicles. We have got Angus Taylor in the Sydney Morning Herald today saying that despite the fact that the Coalition Government has the exact same electric vehicle target as the Labor Party, 50 per cent of new cars sales by 2030 to be electric, Angus Taylor says "Labor's strategy is unsound", despite the policy being exactly the same as Labor's. This is the same Angus Taylor who in October 2018 put out a media release saying that "electric vehicles will soon have access to an ultra-rapid charging network along major driving routes from Brisbane to Adelaide, including around Sydney and Melbourne and separately, separately in Western Australia. The Australian Government, the Morrison Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency will provide $6 million, $6 million taxpayer dollars to charge Fox Limited to develop 21 ultra-rapid charging stations powered by renewable energy," thank you Angus Taylor for that. This government doesn't know if they are coming or going, they have Climate Solutions Package. In that Climate Solutions Package there are 200 mega tonnes of CO2 abatement, that is a third of the target that they need to reach in order to reach their Paris Climate Agreement. In that an electric vehicle policy - in fact there is a very helpful chart. You can go and look it up on the climate solutions package right here, there is the electric vehicle strategy. Ten mega tonnes of CO2 that they project that they will remove in order to meet their Paris Climate Targets, how are they going to do that? They are going to do that as they told us in Estimates last week, by 2030 they will have 50 per cent of new vehicles sales in Australia being electric. Where have I heard that Bill? I think you announced that.

Now listen, this government really doesn’t know whether they are coming or going on electric vehicles, they might want to have a look at the long list of people who have endorsed Labor’s policy and I guess by extension and probably endorse the Coalition with their 50 per cent target like the Australians Logistics Council, we have Toyota, we have NRMA, the Smart Energy Council, The Clean Energy Council, the Electric Vehicle Council, the Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries, Atlassian founder Mike Cannon Brooks, Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, Alex Turnbull, Lucy Turnbull and another guy you might have heard of, Malcolm Turnbull. It is hard not to imagine Scott Morrison and Angus Taylor calling each other on their land lines planning to swap cassette mixed tapes of Duran Duran and Huey Lewis and The News and making plans on Friday night to get together to watch a VHS of that movie Flying High, I tell you what though, here is one man who won't be in that little phone call, who probably isn't part of that special group Josh Frydenberg, and I will end on his words, "A global revolution in electric vehicles is underway, and with the right preparation, planning and policies Australian consumers are set to be the big beneficiaries." Thank you Josh.

SHORTEN: It seems a shame not end the press conference at that stage it was such a good point. Are there any last questions?

JOURNALIST: You sort of touched on it before but does Labor then have plans to offer millions of dollars to these automotive giants to help resurrect the car industry.
 
SHORTEN: We can't put back together what the Liberals have destroyed. We can't bring Holden and Ford and Toyota back. We had a great car industry and it certainly didn't require the sort tax assistance which this government gives multinationals or big banks, but they blew it. They wrecked the car industry and I for one am not going to forgive them for that. But you can't put it back together again. But I don’t want Australia to be a country who misses out on the future. How did we get to a set of circumstances where you ‘ve got a Prime Minister in a government campaigning against electric vehicles? Let's just deal with the scare nonsense, no one is going to take your car off you okay, but why should we deny Australians in the next dozen years the opportunity for cheaper, more fuel efficient cars, world’s best technology. When did this become a country who decided to pull up the drawbridge and say the rest of the world is too hard, we are afraid of the future and we are just going to live in a black and white world, no colour TV, an AM world not FM world, no Wi-Fi, no smartphones. Australians are early adaptors, they love new technology, we will work with industry, we will work with the people. We should be a country in my opinion who makes things, we can make electric vehicles, we are certainly not going to say no, but we have no specific plans of the nature which the Government is trying to cook up at the minute.
 
JOURNALIST:  Will there be a target for how many of those are built in Australia?

SHORTEN: We have to walk before we run, first of all we have to get rid of a government who thinks that electric vehicles are the devil. One final thing just to finish up - I just say to Mr Morrison, for goodness sake mate call the election. I am relaxed when you call it, we're ready , we've got the policies, I've got a united team, we've got a vision for the future. It’s no skin off my nose if you drag it on and on, the people of Australia deserve better from their Government, stop wasting the advertising, let's just call the election. You can call it tonight, you could drive to Yarralumla, you do it tomorrow, maybe you do it Sunday, maybe that makes you feel very on top of everything, but the reality is there will be an election, let's get on with it. The Australian people actually want to make a choice , six years of instability, six years three Prime Ministers, 13 energy policies, enough is enough, times up, let’s have an election.

Thanks everybody.

RUSSELL ROBERTSON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CAPRICORNIA:  We are here at the Hastings Deering workshop and we are hearing about Labor's commitment to apprentices and TAFE. Only a Labor Government will bring these TAFE positions in, a hundred thousand free TAFE roles and subsidising as we move forward. This is our commitment to the region and our commitment to the trades. Labor wants to see more tradespersons not less, unlike the LNP we don't cut tradespeople and we don't cut TAFE. We are about making sure that our kids who want to do trades know that it is a respectable job and we want to encourage it. We are also here thanks to Bill, we have had another announcement on the regions and that's our commitment to a $1 million study into the Rockhampton airport. This study will show how important it is and what we can do to increase agriculture produce and passengers into CQ (Central Queensland). This will be a great opportunity for us to again highlight Labor’s commitment to the regions and again improve local facilities and not turn our back on the local Capricornia area like the current LNP message. We've seen the local LNP turn their back on local apprentices and TAFEs and the local airport. Only a Labor led Bill Shorten Government will generate this prosperity for Capricornia. I would like to give Bill the opportunity to talk more on this issue, Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Russell. Great to be here with 5th generation coal miner Russell Robertson, Labor's standard bearer in the upcoming Capricornia election. I am also here with Zac Beers who is running for the seat just south of Capricornia he is running in Flynn and he lives in Gladstone. He started on the tools, he has been a representative of workers, I've got a couple of great candidates in Central Queensland here. We've been at Hastings Deerings today, Hasting Deering's is a very good company. It employs apprentices, it is bucking the trend. It is one of the biggest employers of diesel fitters in the nation. But what I see here, we could see in a thousand workshops right across Central Queensland and the whole of Australia. I want Australia to go back to being a tradie nation, 1.6 million of our fellow Australians got a trade qualification, my father was a fitter and turner. But what we have seen under the LNP Government is we've seen a virtual destruction of so many apprenticeship positions. A lot of people I think are surprised to learn that under the Liberals we have seen the Liberal-Nationals, we have seen 150,000 fewer apprenticeships now than there were six years ago. But not to worry, Labor at the next election is presenting an exciting future for the trades. What we are going to do is pay the upfront fees for 100,000 apprentices over the next three years.. Maybe some of the young TA’s here who are seeking to get apprenticeships next year will be able to benefit from our fee support. And by the way we’re paying the fees, we’re not giving them a loan and asking for it back, this is just a grant. Also what we said last week in our Budget reply is that we want to give some subsidies to employers – not a king’s ransom, but a certain amount, a few thousand dollars - to help provide the incentive to employ apprentices to give them their first start. In your first and second year, apprentices are doing more learning than they are contributing to the bottom line of a business, but we’ve got to invest in our young, and we’ve got to invest in adults seeking to retrain. So we’ve got a great plan for apprenticeships. Pay upfront fees, work with employers, but also in Central Queensland, we’ve got an ambitious set of infrastructure works. The Rocky Ring road, we want to do more with Great Keppel Island. We want to do more about improving dual lanes between Yeppoon and of course Rockhampton. We understand that Central Queensland needs good roads and that’s what Labor’s offering. Apprenticeships, good roads and infrastructure jobs. When you put that on top of the other exciting things we’re going to do, such as get wages moving again in this country, such as making sure that we don’t have the current status quo of wage stagnation, where everything’s going up but your wages. We’ll offer Australians a wages policy, modest but meaningful wages growth, reversing the cuts to penalty rates, and we’re going to regulate shonky labour hire, because we’re sick and tired like most Australians of seeing permanent jobs replaced by casualised, contractor, temporary visa or labour hire jobs. So we have a plan for Central Queensland and the working people of Central Queensland. I should also say that it doesn’t stop there, and today I’m very pleased to announce that a Federal Labor Government, if elected, will invest a million dollars in the business case to make Rockhampton an international airport. You shouldn’t have to fly south in order to go north from Rockhampton, our produce should be able to enter the markets of Asia, we should be able to see some of the tourist boom come straight from Asia to Rockhampton, rather than flying over Rockhampton to Brisbane or Sydney, then making the trip if you feel like it back up to Rocky. Rockhampton Airport is a vital part of the future of Rockhampton. It’s important in its own way as the cattle, as the mining, as the manufacturing, and the engineering, and the human services, and the educational services. Rockhampton’s got it all. What it needs though in Canberra is a Government who knows where Rockhampton is. I’m really pleased with the fact this is my 13th visit to Rockhampton since I’ve been opposition leader, and this is a town which knows how to push on to the future, from the meatworks with Mr (inaudible) and what they’re doing there, right through to the tourism of Great Keppel Island. People in Central Queensland and Rockhampton are always willing to take a risk, they’re willing to try to try and improve the circumstances of the local community, they just need a Government in Canberra who’s on their side. So from apprentices, to wages, to backing in ‘Australian Made’, to making sure that we’ve got good infrastructure projects and of course tourism, Labor's got Capricornia's back and we offer Russell Robertson to be voted for in 6 weeks’ time. Happy to take a couple quick questions.

JOURNALIST: This airport business case, how will this work, and what will we see happen with that?

SHORTEN: Well we'll do it in conjunction with the Airport and the Council, I  mean we've got to do a business case to make sure the numbers stack up, but I am very optimistic about airports in regional Queensland in many ways just like railways were to 19th century Queensland, expansion of airports is to 21st century Queensland. We shouldn't let the tyranny of distance stop Rockhampton from the growth it deserves. The reality is that you shouldn't, if you want to go north, have to fly south. I think we can break that tyranny of that by making sure we have Rockhampton as a more developed airport. Because once you've got a more developed airport, once the case is made and the facilities and amenities are here, we'll see more flights - and it won't just be international - what we'll see is more competition on the domestic airline routes, and anyone who flies in North Queensland knows that the big airlines often take the passengers as a captive market and charge them horrendous amounts of money to fly distances where in other parts of Australia you can fly to Bali for cheaper. We've got to back Australia, and that's why I want to see Rockhampton airport fulfil its position as a real economic engine of Rockhampton and Central Queensland.

JOURNALIST: Rocky's been an international airport for over twenty years, and Kirsten Livermore has been here, and so was Marjorie Henzell and they never did nothing it's been in their time it was an international airport, it's been an international airport for probably over twenty years.

SHORTEN: Yeah but we've got to develop it. Everyone knows that it's been one of the missing links, doesn't it. And again, whilst you speak about Kirsten Livermore, the local member who has been here for the last few elections has been Michelle Landry. So at some point, when does the current member become accountable for the lack of action? I agree with the observation you make - that Rockhampton airport should have been developed a lot more than it has. I agree with you. But when do the current LNP members stop blaming Labor MP's - who haven't been members of parliament here for a long time - they've been getting good money for the last six years, they've been getting excellent money for the last number of years, when is it they actually do something for the wages they get paid?

JOURNALIST: What are you doing for North Queensland?

SHORTEN: When it comes to North - Far North Queensland, and Cairns - we see that tourism is a big part of that future. So we've said that we want to do a number of things to develop Cairns and its role in tropical Queensland. One of which, we want to put $60 million into the Cairns hospital to make sure that it gets the support it deserves. The second thing we're doing is that we're also extending - we're going to take a billion dollars out of the Northern Australian Infrastructure Fund, and put it into a separate tourism fund. Tourism is a big part of Cairn's future, international students are a big part of Cairns' future. We also want to back in more infrastructure, so we've said that we want to build the road extending through Cairns going out to the Airport, because we think the congestion, especially in the Northern suburbs of Cairns is something to behold. If you look at how the Northern suburbs of Cairns have expanded in the last few years, it's like suburban Australia. And the traffic jams there are quite remarkable, and what we need to do is invest in the roads and infrastructure of the northern suburbs of Cairns, because it's one of the most liveable places in the world, not just Australia, but what we also need to do is make sure the road infrastructure is keeping up with what we do in Cairns. Thanks.
ZAC BEERS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FLYNN: My name is Zac Beers and I am the Labor Candidate for Flynn. It's great to be here in Gladstone today. I'm joined by Bill Shorten, Labor's Opposition Leader and Catherine King, Labor's Shadow Minister for Health. Today we're making another important announcement for healthcare here in Central Queensland and it's quite clear that only Labor is committed to delivering better health outcomes for the people of Central Queensland. Today, Bill Shorten will be talking about our announcement to deliver a radiation treatment centre here in Gladstone to make sure that people can get treatment closer to home. This is in addition to our announcement to purchase the Mater Hospital to expand the Gladstone Hospital here and our commitment to deliver a publicly funded MRI licence for the people of Gladstone. Labor's commitment is clear when it comes to healthcare for people in regional Queensland and that commitment is quite simple: it shouldn't be your postcode that determines the quality of healthcare that you receive. On the other side of politics we've seen nothing but cuts. $6.1 million cut from the Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service by the LNP Government on Ken O'Dowd's watch. Nearly a million dollars cut from the Gladstone Hospital. If we want to get better health outcomes it's clear that only Labor will deliver the solutions for people from Regional Queensland. I'll let Bill talk a little bit more about our announcement today.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Zac. It's great to be here with Catherine King, our Shadow Health Spokesperson and Zac Beers our Candidate in Flynn. It's great to be back in Queensland frankly. I spent more than 100 days here since the last election in 2016. I've had the opportunity to spend 50 days in regional Queensland. In fact, since I became Leader, this is now my 10th visit to Gladstone. So, I've had the opportunity to talk to people in Gladstone, to listen to the staff who work here and patients who work at this fantastic hospital and I've got the message loud and clear from Gladstone. Take away all the other nonsense of politics, a number one issue for people in Gladstone is access to quality healthcare. At the end of the day, the most important things in your life are your family and your health. If you've got those, then everything else is you know, an added bonus. But if you don't have them then everything else is very bleak indeed. So, what Labor's said last week is that we've said that we want to improve our Medicare system. It's a great system, when you get off a plane from overseas, one of the things you love about this country is our Medicare system. But it can do better. What we want to do is we want to make sure that when people are in the fight of their lives, when they get a diagnosis of cancer, that's when you need Government standing alongside you. Australians don't have their hand out for a lot of things but they do pay their taxes to Canberra, they pay their Medicare levy and when you have a loved one who's sick, that's when it all really counts. One in every two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer across their lifetime. It means that right now there's 750,000 of our fellow Australians living with cancer. Now a lot of people thing that when you get the diagnosis of cancer, that everything is paid for, but that isn't the case. We've got a great public system and Labor has helped built it. But we think it's now time to put more resources to help people deal with two big problems with cancer. Cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. So, we want to put much more resources and the Budget can afford it because we've made the economic reform decisions to make multinationals pay their fair share. We want to help people with their out of pocket costs. The other thing which we want to do- and this is particularly today's announcement which will affect the nation but we make it here first in Gladstone because we think that regional Queensland is as important as any other part of Australia so we will make a national announcement here today- is that we want to allocate $500 million to help reduce waiting lists for people waiting to get treatment for cancer in the public system. It's a little known thing but we have some very long waiting times for very lifesaving surgery. Did you know in Australia at the moment that you have to wait for, one in ten people have to wait on average 47 days between the diagnosis and actually having the lump removed from your breast- forty seven days. Did you know that 83 per cent of people who have a positive test from the government colon testing scheme have to wait, have to wait beyond the accepted time- the recommended time to get the treatment. So what happens is, you go through the government screening test. It comes up positive and 83 per cent of our fellow Australians who get a positive test are waiting beyond the recommended time to treat the cancer. This is unacceptable. Did you know that one in 10 Australian men have to wait on average 159 days before they can have their prostate removed. I think these waiting times will stun and surprise people. This is happening to our fellow Australians now. One in ten women waiting 47 days to have vital lifesaving breast surgery. Then we've got one in ten Australian men waiting an average of 159 days to have their prostate removed. When 83 per cent of men or 83 per cent of people, men test for the government bowel screen and they test positive, they've got to wait beyond the recommended time to have the surgical procedures. This is too long. See I've got two get to basic views about cancer: cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. But I've got another view, you can't out-wait cancer. If you've got the diagnosis, that's a shock. You've got a lot to think about, you've got a lot to talk about. It's a real challenge to your resilience. It's a challenge and anxiety on your family. How was it in Australia that we've seen under the current Government waiting lists blow out. Now, the current Prime Minister has been critical of our cancer initiatives putting $2.3 billion extra, he says it's all free, it's all being dealt with in the public system. Well it's not. Quite often in the public system to get the treatment you require, you either have to wait a very long time which forces you into the private system which is expensive  and there are a lot of hidden costs and charges. Labor today is saying because of the reformed decisions we've made we can prioritise reducing waiting lists in our hospital system, reducing waiting lists for life saving surgery. We've got the best staff in the world, we've got the best nurses, we've got the best doctors, they're doing a fantastic job but what they deserve and what patients deserve is a government who is alongside them. When you're in the fight for cancer, you never give up. You never give up. I've seen it in my own family, I've seen it in friends but when the government doesn't properly fund cancer treatment they are giving up. What right does the government have to give up when the patients don't. What right does the government have to give up when the doctors and the nurses don't, when the families don't - for me, they're a very fundamental issue of political priority. I say to the current Prime Minister, if you think the current system is fine, if you think that there aren't any out of pockets, if you think that there aren't waiting lists, come with me. That's all I ask. Now Catherine is about to talk about this but also an exciting announcement to make sure that there is a radiation centre here, treatment centre right here in Gladstone. What that will mean is that 3,000, more than 3,000 people in Gladstone won't have to travel anywhere else to get radiation treatment. That's really going to help people living in Gladstone, it's real, it's no nonsense, it's going to make a difference in people’s lives and treatment. But let's hand over to Catherine to talk more about this exciting announcement.

KING: Thanks Bill and it's terrific to be here again, at Gladstone Hospital with both Bill and Zac announcing our $500 million commitment to public hospitals across the country to drive down outpatient waiting lists, to drive down surgery waiting lists as well. We know for many people when they have a diagnosis or a referral for even exploration of whether they have a diagnosis for cancer they can wait many months to get to see an outpatient appointment. This policy will really make a substantial difference particularly to people who are waiting for things like colonoscopies, for breast reconstruction surgery. In Australia people are waiting, often over a year to have a breast reconstruction after they've had breast cancer surgery. This $500 million will make a huge difference to patients across the country. It will mean 19,000 more breast reconstructions or a possible 250,000 more colonoscopies can be done in our public hospital system because of this investment today and we'll work with the states and territories about how we can make sure that we drive down those outpatient waiting lists. We're also here as part of our fair go action plan for Gladstone investing in a radiation therapy centre here in this community. We know that there are over 3,000 radiation services that are performed here from people in Gladstone in Rockhampton. When you're sick having to travel to actually get that treatment, trying to balance that juggle between your kids and your family and how you manage all of that. When you're really unwell a radiation centre here in Gladstone will make an enormous difference to those people. Bill mentioned again, the costs of cancer, what we're seeing across a community wherever we go whether it's the day oncology patients that we've just talked to today, whether it's people in the private system, public system, the costs of cancer are an enormous burden on our community and I don't understand how Scott Morrison just does not get it. Frankly, I think he's lying when he says that he thinks all cancer services are free for people. He should come with Bill and I to the public hospitals to see cancer patients and actually talk to them about their lived experience of cancer. This is something that's gone on too long and we're very proud to be part of a Labor commitment to improve cancer here in that community.

SHORTEN: Thanks Catherine, well said. Are there any questions for myself?

JOURNALIST: Bill are you confident in the Environment Minister's approval of Adani?

SHORTEN: Just before we get on to the other issues, are there any questions on our commitment on $500 million to reduce waiting times for cancer treatments or indeed our announcement on a new radiation treatment centre in Gladstone? If there aren't that's okay but I'd just like to deal with that first.

JOURNALIST: On the radiation facility, would that be a public or private facility?

KING: It will be a public facility but we will need to put that out to tender as to who is going to be the operator of it and I would certainly hope that Gladstone Hospital puts in for that tender, that'll be up to the health and hospital service to do so but it will be a public facility for public patients.

JOURNALIST: In the past we've struggled to attract specialists to the Gladstone region, are you confident you can get specialists into those facilities?

KING: Look I am, I've seen in other communities when you build first class cancer treatment services it really increases the amount and access of specialists that you have in a community but of course what also really matters is the dollars. If you've cut $6.1 million out of central Queensland’s public hospitals- you know that makes a massive difference to being able to employ specialists in health services across this community including here in Gladstone. And that's what the Morrison Government consistently has done, slashed $160 million out of Queensland public hospitals, it's no wonder that our public hospitals are saying they're struggling to keep up with demand.

JOURNALIST: And what are some of the measures as part of the $500 million commitment that will actually reduce waiting times?

KING: Yeah, so what that will do, there will be a national partnership agreement with every state and territory on cancer care and that will go towards more outpatient appointments, more breast reduction surgery, more colonoscopies. It will drive all of those things to drive down those waiting lists - both to get on. You know, there's a waiting list to get on to the outpatients waiting list in the first place. Then once you finally got your outpatient appointment, you then have to wait often months and months if you do need surgery - and often also, time to wait for new scans in public hospitals as well. This is extra money on top of Labor's already announced $2.8 billion better hospital fund, so more money will go to every single hospital across the country because of that and now $500 billion specifically for cancer outpatients and cancer surgery.

SHORTEN: Thanks, everybody. Sorry, did you ask your question about -

JOURNALIST: So the Environment Minister has given the green light to Adani. Are you confident of her approval and do you think it stacks up environmentally and financially?
SHORTEN: Well Adani has become a political football and it has become a political football within the Government. I don't think that's an exaggeration. I don't know what some of the LNP Senators like McGrath and the others were thinking, writing a letter which gets leaked to put more pressure on the Minister - where the Minister's got to make a decision on approvals, then all of a sudden a couple of the LNP heavies say 'unless you make the decision one way rather than the other way, we will publicly humiliate you and try and get you out of your job'. How can someone make a decision free of pressure when they're being bullied? I mean another explanation could be that she's satisfied by the science but the LNP heavy handedness, you know, Bjelke-Petersen-style thuggishness trying to pressure people now creates a cloud over a process which didn't need to be there but for the Government's division in their own ranks. There could be another explanation of course. There is explosive, and frankly very surprising, revelations on Four Corners last night about the conduct of the Minister in charge - one of the ministers in charge of our national security, where it's cash for access and meeting people connected to the Chinese Government. This is, this is very unhealthy and maybe the Government's decided to rush the decision out on Adani so they don't have to talk about a bigger problem that they've created on their own. For us it's always been the same, it doesn't matter where we've been in Australia and it doesn't matter what month or what year it is. It's got to stack up. I do say, and I make it very clear - and I think people agree with this - that taxpayer money shouldn't be used to fund this project. Now, the Queensland Government has got to go through its processes.

JOURNALIST: Will you be seeking to review this decision if you win government?
SHORTEN: First of all, we've got to see what the Queensland Government does. And secondly, we will just adhere to the law. We're not interested in sovereign risk. Plenty of people have got plenty of opinions on the project. We'll just be guided by the law and by the science. Sorry, I'll go you and then you.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Landry this morning said that Labor's Just Transition program shows that the party is trying to destroy the mining community in Central Queensland. What's your response to that?
SHORTEN: Michelle Landry, goodness me. We all know she's feeling a bit of the pressure but I want to commentate on her, I want to go to the heart of the matter. Labor's proposing setting up an authority which will actually plan for the workforce of the future in the mining industry. Unlike a lot of LNP people, I've spent most of my adult life representing workers, including miners. I am sick and tired of big companies closing power stations or closing mines and just throwing the workers on the scrapheap. Merely because we want to plan what happens to people doesn't mean we presume that they will lose their jobs, which is what they're saying. They almost say that if you plan for the future of workers, that somehow that's wrong. I have to take a different view. I've met the workers at QNI, you know, Queensland Nickel in Townsville. This government didn't give a tinker's toss about what happened to them. I've been down to the La Trobe Valley where power stations closed - and this government didn't do a thing to help them. Just because we want to help workers dislocated by change, doesn't mean we want them to be dislocated by change, it's just I've been around. I saw the whole car industry in Australia destroyed on the watch of the Liberal National Government. 40,000 people lost their jobs. This government had no plan for these workers. Our just transition authority is a recommendation from the mining lodges of the coal miners, from the control rooms of energy plants. They're saying 'Bill, we know that change is part of life. Wouldn't it be good if for once that if the Government got ahead of the change rather than woke up like stunned mullets in the morning and go 'oh gee what just happened then'. So, this is an industrial relations proposition which says that I don't want to see blue collar workers thrown on the scrapheap. One example of what I mean is if one power station was to close down because a company makes a decision, and another one still functioning, I don't think he should have forced redundancies of everyone from the power station that's closing when there might be volunteers who in the stage of their life, they wouldn't mind a redundancy package at the power station that's still open. I just think it's common sense - and it's way I've always done my business - that if you have some workers, maybe they're younger, they've got the mortgages, the families, they're in their 30s and 40s and 50s, they want to keep working. Isn't it smart to have a Just Transition Authority, a scheme whereby we pool the redundancies? There might be some people who are a bit older, you know, at the skinny end of their working life and what they want to do is take a package from the power station still open. So all we're doing is saying let's have some common sense about the workforce of the future. Let's have some re-training rather than waking up one morning, finding out a multinational has made a decision based on a boardroom in New York or Beijing, and they're going to shut this operation - and the Government flapping around uselessly as this government has done for the last six years. So sorry, I'm not going to take industrial relations advice from Michelle Landry. I've been there when the gates have closed - not because I wanted the gates to close but what I do know is that people need a plan and need some hope. That's what Labor will give working people. We're born of working people, our party. That's why we're giving people hope in the fight of their lives on cancer. And if change happens, I'm not going to leave workers behind. It's all right for these Liberals, they go off and get their consultancies and their embassy postings.  It's alright for the senior executives of these big power companies. They get golden parachutes. Problem is too many workers get pushed off the plane and no parachute.
JOURNALIST: Mark Butler is quoted in today's Daily Telegraph as saying that the Just Transition Authority is strongly supported by coal miners. How did you find that out?

SHORTEN: We spoke to CFMEU Mining and Energy Division. This is not secret. It's not a secret strategy. Go and talk to workers. I’ve been talking to workers my whole life. I've been there when they've lost their jobs. This argument that the government says we should never plan for workers to lose their jobs and some have to plan for workers to lose their jobs you want them to lose their jobs, nothing could be further from the truth. I was there when Ansett collapsed. That wasn't the fault of the workforce. 16,000 people, 16,000 people. I've seen the toll it takes when workplaces unexpectedly close. We are going to make it a requirement that if a big mining company or a power company wants to close they've got to give years of notice, not a notice to the stock market after 10 o'clock and then the gates close at 4 o'clock. I'm about treating workers with respect. The LNP don't have a wages policy. They don't have a policy to look after workers dislocated by change. The big problem in Central Queensland just like it was in Australia, everything is going up except people's wages. This government they wouldn't understand it.
JOURNALIST:  It's funny you mentioned the CFMEU. Stephen Smyth has asked if he'd like to know what the members that he represents in places like Moranbah or Middlemount will 'just transition' into. Are there any viable alternatives for coal miners in those communities?
SHORTEN: Well let's face it. What we need to do is have an alternative plan, as well as those existing jobs. But in the Latrobe Valley I understand no one wanted to see those power stations closed, but I've been there. Sometimes companies close businesses. It can happen in a regional media office, can't it, a TV room, it can happen in privatisation by the LNP, and it can happen with mining companies. What we want to do is make sure they've got training, go to TAFE. We've also got a whole raft of projects for infrastructure in central and north Queensland. Just here in Gladstone alone, a vote for Zac beers will see the Gladstone port access road built. One hundred million dollars, 200 jobs. We want to make Gladstone the hydrogen capital of Australia and indeed the world. Hydrogen is an exciting new source of fuel. Did you know that it's estimated that by 2050 there'll be 2 billion electric vehicles, and of that half of them will be powered by hydrogen?  Australia is at a crossroads. We either decide that we 're afraid of the future, that we should never plan for the future we should never see what's happening elsewhere and see how we can make that benefit for Australia. Good leaders think about the future. They just don't tell people what they want to hear.
JOURNALIST: The vehicle emissions standard. When would that apply? Do you think voters should be told when they'd be put in place before the election?
SHORTEN: Listen I see where the government's going on this, they want to scare you about new vehicle emission standards. Did you know that just about the rest of the world the OECD nations already has vehicle emission standards?  We would be looking at something comparable to US standards which is below Europe. We don't make cars here in Australia more so the cars that we import will all be built in many cases so these new standards. But we will work with the industry, we'll work with the manufacturers on how we introduce that standard. This sort of reminds me of the argument and some of you might be too young to know it.  In fact, I'm just guessing, did you know that 25 years ago we had a big debate in Australia about moving from leaded fuel to unleaded fuel? If you read back, and I'm a student history, and read back 25 years ago people said going to unleaded fuel was the end of the car industry, no one could afford their cars. Well it didn't happen. One thing I do know is that when you drive to Sydney, the skies and clearer now than when we had leaded fuel. So, change is part of life. And I just say to families and people listening to this, no one's going to make you give up your ute, no one's going to confiscate it. But the idea that we shouldn't be looking for more fuel-efficient vehicles is silly. The Government themselves have said that electric vehicles for example will lead to a reduction in the costs of running a motor car, and the same will be the case with fuel standards and fuel emission standards, so we'll get it right.  I'm a pragmatic person, I work with industry. That's my whole track record through life, we will work with industry. But what I won't do is tell the patient just what they want to hear. I mean no doctor - if you've got someone who's you know you've got a very unhealthy lifestyle says you're fine, don't change because I don't want to upset you. What I will do is make sure that people don't get forgotten. That earlier question about how we help workers for a change, either we can say you're on your own or we say we're alongside you it's a bit like the same way we're taking the battle against cancer. Either we can say system's fine it's not my problem I just want to be the Government and not worry about you or we can make improvements, and the same goes on climate change. Do we really want to be a country of hands on a worse deal to younger people, we'll do it in a sensible way.

JOURNALIST: Did you plan on putting that standard in place?
SHORTEN: We'll consult with industry about that.
JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton said Sam Dastyari has some questions to answer over the revelations on 4 corners last night. Do you think he holds responsibility as well? And do you think the federal integrity commission?
SHORTEN: Well I don't know if the gentleman you spoke about said that before or after former Prime Minister Turnbull has intervened in this matter. And I think Malcolm Turnbull has said it best here. I just want to quote I agree with his following comments he's just made in the last hour: Scott Morrison is the prime minister and you can't wave this off and say it's part of the gossip or the Canberra bubble. This is the national security of Australia. So, I think the revelations last night go to two issues, one I do agree with Mr Turnbull. This is a national security issue and Mr Morrison has to take responsibility for these revelations. Two, it just goes to show the ongoing division in the Liberal Party. The former guy criticising the current guy, the challenger, Mr Dutton, you know, he's in the target sights of Mr Turnbull. This is a Government who needs a rest on the Opposition benches to get their act together because they are so chaotic. In terms of the National Integrity Commission, I've led the debate on that. I called for that at the beginning of last year, not this year. The Government has come up with so many different excuses as to why they can't do it. Yet again, this is a Government - bluntly - where the wheels are falling off. They’re appointing cronies to these positions, they've got this Paladin Defense contract which is got many questions about it. They have got this problem where national security is now a question mark. This is a Government that is so consumed with hating each other, they're no longer focusing on the people and worryingly now, national security there are question marks over the handling of this matter.

JOURNALIST: Bill, I'll just take you back to the Transition Authority. Matt Canavan spoke in Mackay this morning and he just wants a full explanation of what it really is.

SHORTEN: Maybe Matt Canavan should have worried about what happened to car industry workers – he didn't cry any tears over those 40,000 jobs. I don’t know what he's done about making sure that QNI workers find jobs, I don’t know what he's done about the LaTrobe Valley workers who lost their jobs. What a Just Transition Authority is, it's an idea that's come from unions and some progressive companies who said, ‘Why don't we, if we know change is coming, put in place an authority to help plan the future workforce?’ To answer that question that Stephen Smyth raised, who is one of the leaders of coal miners and some of the Queensland mining lodges, what we need to do is not tell workers when a company makes an announcement that they are going to lose their job ‘Sorry, here's your package. Spend it, and then you can get Centrelink’. Maybe we actually need to give a stuff about what happens to workers. You know, this Government is crying crocodile tears over us planning for the future of Australian workers. I have never been caught in a traffic jam of Liberal limousines when workers have lost their jobs. I have never been caught in a courtroom or an insolvency administration hearing where a LNP politician said ‘what about the workers and their entitlements?’. They're so busy, you know, this Government, they cry crocodile tears for workers. They haven't got a wages policy, have they? They cut the penalty rates, they have accepted the cuts to penalty rates of 700,000 people. This is a planning authority who can start putting in place schemes to make sure that we can help train up workers, so they can find other jobs if they lose their existing jobs. So if this bloke is going to say to every worker in Queensland ‘we don't want a plan to help retrain you’, then he has got a guarantee that no one will ever lose their jobs, ever, and that's clearly absurd, as we both appreciate it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it is fair that Fraser Anning has avoided criminal charges over the ‘Egg Boy’ incident?

SHORTEN: Listen, I find the less time I talk about that fellow, the better for all concerned. I'm not going to give him any more oxygen. I just want to make one more point if there are no more questions. Mr Morrison should call the election. Just call it. This sort of politically tricky game, where somehow he thinks he is clever by not calling the election. I don't know, that is just an excuse to spend between $600,000 and $1 million a day on taxpayer's money - your money - on advertising to pump up their tyres. Just call the election. I also wish to inform you that I have written to Mr Morrison this morning. Whenever he calls the election in the next four days - if it’s Thursday of Wednesday or Sunday - the election period will fall across some fundamentally very important days. Anzac Day is a sacred day in Australia, Good Friday is a very important day of religion observation of people of many Christian faiths, so I am proposing that on the Good Friday and Anzac Day we have a truce - we don’t subject the people of Australia to our political ads, and overt campaigning. Of course MPs will want to attend events, sporting and symbolic events and Anzac and the Dawn service, of course people will want to observe religious matters and other matters on Good Friday. But why don’t we at least agree, I am going to say this to Scott Morrison via yourselves, as I have said to him in writing, why don’t we at least agree not to have paid campaigning, the big political machinery on Good Friday and Anzac Day. Why don’t we give people two days off from the election, I think that will do the nation the world of good.

JOURNALIST: The man that Dutton is alleged to have met with, Chinese billionaire Huang Xiangmo, have you ever had any dealings or met with him previously?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I think a lot of people have. But I don’t think anyone has ever had to pay $20,000 to have a meeting. And let’s go further I notice that LNP Senator McDonald, he's I think in a very racist undertone asked Senator Wong, Penny Wong - is she related to him? This fellow comes from mainland China. Penny’s family even though she has been here 43 years comes from Malaysia. I am sick and tired of right wing conservatives assuming that everyone who is Asian is related. Penny Wong shouldn’t have to fight this fight on her own. Can we just ask LNP and anyone else who wants to say something stupid about people from Asia; grow up, get over it, don’t share your silly thoughts of it and ideally don’t even think it to begin with. Shame on you.

JOURNALIST: So you didn’t take any money for your meeting with him?

SHORTEN: Mate all of our disclosures are put out there and let’s be also very clear. When Senator Dastyari made a mistake of judgement, I met with him and he resigned. Let’s see how we go with the Government living up to that standard.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thank you very much for coming out this morning and thank you for the Australian Education Union and to the principal's organisations from around Australia for putting on this wonderful display of the difference between Labor's education policy for schools and the Liberals and Nationals cuts to public schools. Every parent knows that one of the most important things we can do as parents is invest in our children education. Make sure that they get every opportunity to meet their full potential. And as a nation, that's what we should be doing too. We're here today with teachers and principals because they feel it so deeply. When they're in their schools and they are starved of resources and they can't give kids the individual teaching they need; the extra support if they're falling behind, the extra extension activities if they're gifted and talented, the languages, the sports, the music, the arts, a first grade teaching of coding and STEM subjects. Teachers feel that and principals feel it and that's what's brought them to Canberra today, on budget day, to show in this visual representation of every school in Australia, the difference between Labor's fair funding commitment - an extra $14 billion over the decade - and the Liberals and Nationals cuts to every school in Australia, every public school in Australia. Now, I'm delighted to be here with Bill Shorten and with many of my Labor colleagues because Bill and my Labor colleagues know that investing in education is one of the most important things that we can do. And tonight, in tonight's budget, you'll see once again a last minute effort to repair years of damage from the Liberals and Nationals. Well, let's see what they do for public education because this is one of the areas with the largest cut and the biggest damage. Thanks, Bill.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, everybody. I'd just add to Tanya's comments, the education cuts of the last six years are an election issue in the next six weeks. We understand that tonight's budget is much more a political leaflet than it is an economic plan for the future. But one thing which the Government could do is reverse their $14 billion cuts to public education. Because after all, what could be more important than giving our kids the best possible education? I believe in better schools not bigger tax loopholes. I believe in better schools not short-term political budget statements like we will see tonight. Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, will you match the increase to the offset to $1,000? I know you're on $920 at the moment but will you then extend that to $1,000?

SHORTEN: Thank you for reminding everyone that last year, the Government said they could only find $500 for a working person on perhaps $90,000 a year. But because of our economic reforms, we said we would increase the refund available to working Australians to $928. The Government's now realised that they have a problem, that Labor has bigger, better, fairer tax cuts for nearly 10 million working people. We will study what they offer tonight. The point about it is really, and your question neatly captures it, this is a Government who's run out of time. All that is left to them is to play catch up. They're playing catch up on our better, fairer tax policies. But what they should also do is play catch up on having a wages policy, having a renewable energy policy, reversing the cuts to hospitals. They should play catch up on our 3 year old universal kindergarten commitment. They should play catch up about putting back the $14 billion that they promised and never delivered for Australian schoolchildren. So we'll see what happens and you know, the beauty of Labor's position is we've made the hard economic decisions. I think all of you who are seasoned observers understand that because we're cracking down on loopholes, we have options to reduce the debt, look after working families and also, reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals.

JOURNALIST: The government claims that your energy policy will effectively devastate Australian jobs. What modelling, if any, do you have which can be delivered to reassure the public that that is not the case?

SHORTEN:First of all, don't we all owe it to lift the level of journalism in this country and not simply repeat unsubstantiated Government attacks?  What we've done - and I'll give you three or four proof points to help reassure you because I actually think Australian people want action on climate change. I think there are over a Prime Minister bringing in a piece of coal like a pet rock and brandishing it as some sort of lucky charm in Parliament. The fact of the matter is that the Liberal Party can't get energy policy right. The fact of the matter is that if they were fair dinkum on climate change and energy policy, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. But let's go to some of the proof points. First of all, McKibbin's modelling shows that a 45 per cent emissions reduction will have the same impact as 26 per cent because we will include international credits. First of all, another proof point, our commitment to investing in renewable energy will see the generation of 70,000 new jobs. These are good quality, new jobs in a growth industry which we can help export. Let's have a look also at Malcolm Turnbull's work. The Government can't have it both ways. We've borrowed their safeguards mechanism to help reduce emissions in heavy industrial polluters. We've borrowed their mechanism. So if they don't like what we're doing, they're actually saying their own mechanism doesn't work. Or to put another way, last year or just before they got rid of poor old Malcolm, they were proposing a National Energy Guarantee which would help power bills come down by about $500. So we've taken up the National Energy Guarantee, they haven't. So when you look at it, we're using their logic, we're using the best science and evidence, we're focusing on increasing jobs and now the Government - even the current leaders of the Government voted for Mr Turnbull's plans last year. We've borrowed them and now because we've borrowed the framework, all of a sudden they don't like them. People are over that day to day partisan-political rubbish. But if you really want to look at the cost of climate change, have a look at the cost of inaction. Do you really want to face your kids and your grand-kids and say 'well, we had the chance in 2019 to take real action on climate change and we did nothing'. The cost of natural disasters last year was $18 billion. Talk to the Insurance Council of Australia and they'll say they want to see action on climate change. And most of industry actually accept what we're saying. We've put aside $300 million to help work with the emissions intensive trade exposed sector. So when the Government runs a scare campaign, you've got to ask yourself why are they still running the same scare campaign for 10 years when in fact, we've gone backwards on climate change and power bills have gone up. They've had six years to prove their scare campaigns work, they've had six years to prove that under a Coalition Government they can get energy prices down - they've failed every test they've ever set. Sorry, I think you were informed beforehand that I didn't have much time but maybe one question.

JOURNALIST: I've just got one back on the offsets, if I may. It sounds like the Coalition wants to get those tax offsets through Parliament this week before it breaks ahead of the election. Will Labor work with the Government to make that happen?
SHORTEN: Well, we'll have to see what the proposals are. We don't give them a blank cheque. If it's as it has been outlined, you know, we'll have to see. I mean, the Government don't always drop everything, do they? I imagine there should be something new in the Budget, so we'll have to wait and see. But in terms of working with the Government, we've always been pragmatic about good ideas but it does highlight this sudden rush. Why is it that they are now saying they want to do in the next six weeks, what they haven't done in the last six years? Why is it that they only scheduled 10 days of Parliament in eight months? So I understand the Government wants to rush, rush, rush - they've got this new found sense of urgency. You got to ask yourself: why did they only schedule so few days of Parliament if what they're doing is so important for the Australian people? It's a lot more con than it is substance. Very last, Jennifer.

JOURNALIST: Just on the surplus, please. Do you not consider this a mark of good economic management that we are back in the black and will you offer bigger and better surpluses?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, let's see the final numbers and I want to thank the coal and the iron ore industry. Because it's that quantity of coal and iron ore going to North Asia which has done the heavy lifting. But of course, you've got to be careful of relying on commodities to sustain. I mean, there's a couple of reasons why we will have a good economic surplus if that is the case. One is the level of income taxes that people are paying has gone up. So if we have a surplus, I'm not going to thank the Government, I thank the Australian people and we thank our export resources industry. But let's see and you know we'll be constructive. But let's just call it what it is people. This Government's had six years. What is it that they say they can do in the next six weeks than the previous six years they didn't do. There's been too much instability; three Liberal Prime Ministers, 13 energy policies, 22 reshuffles. Now they want at five minutes to midnight to get you to forget all the chaos, all of the division, all of the argy-bargy between the Nationals and the Liberals and the One Nation people - and they all want to say it'll all be better and none of that ever happened. I don't think Australians are that easily fooled. And when it comes to public education, they should just put the $14 billion back that they always promised they'd deliver but they've let the kids and families and teachers of Australia down. Thanks everybody.
ALICIA PAYNE, LABOR'S CANDIDATE FOR CANBERRA: Good morning everyone. My name is Alicia Payne, I am Labor's candidate for the seat of Canberra, and I'm thrilled this morning to welcome our Leader Bill Shorten and his colleagues to talk today about this very important announcement on climate change. I'd also like to acknowledge my fellow ACT candidate David Smith, who is the candidate for Bean and current Senator. Only Labor will take the action we need on climate change and I really look forward to talking more with Canberrans about this really important policy. So I'm going to hand over now to Bill Shorten and Mark Butler to talk further. Thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks. That was Alicia Payne, one of Labor's great new candidates running here in the ACT for the federal election. Well, good morning everybody. There couldn't be a better morning, because today after six years of Coalition chaos I'm pleased that I and my colleagues are able to announce further details of our climate change policy. Our policy will take real action on climate change, it'll generate a lot of jobs and it'll also help put downward pressure on the price of energy and the cost of living. For six years Australian politics has been broken. People do not understand why it has been so hard for this Government to form an energy policy and take real action on climate change. Anyone who thinks that the current coalition, in the next three years can do what they haven't been able to do in the last six years with all of their disunity, that is a triumph of hope over experience. But Labor on the other hand, we've been doing the work, we've been talking to the experts, we've been listening to communities, we've been listening to people who want us to hand on a better deal on our environment to our kids and our grandkids than that which we inherited. But for too long inaction, chaos, division, and going backwards has been the order of the day. Put simply, our climate change policy - and Mark will go into further detail in a minute - it's about the future versus the past. It's about hope versus fear. It's about handing on a better deal to our kids. It's about not putting off the problems of carbon pollution to another generation merely because of disunity and dysfunction in the current government. Now, our plan for climate change will ensure that the economy keeps growing. What we're going to do is invest in more renewables. We've already illustrated that through supporting households, the two million households already who have rooftop solar, be able to acquire batteries and install batteries. It's about working with heavy industry. It's about partnering with business. It's about partnering with unions but it's about working for the environment. So we're going to take the structure which former Prime Minister Turnbull outlined in the National Energy Guarantee and extend that because people are over the division and the debates and the buck passing. We're going to work with the people who work on the land to further improve our opportunities to reduce our carbon footprint, to reduce carbon pollution. We're going to make sure that we look after our emissions intensive trade exposed industrial sector to make sure that whatever changes we make we do so on the basis that we can protect traditional jobs in steel, and aluminium, and cement, and other very vital parts of our economy, both in our cities and our regions. It's also about improving our transportation sector and what it can contribute to reducing the harmful effects of climate change. To that end. I'm really pleased to announce that what we will do, is we are going to make it more convenient to be able to drive an electrical vehicle in Australia. It's about time this country got in front of the electric car revolution sweeping the rest of the world. It's about time that this country decided that we can make electric vehicles in Australia, that we can also help create a set of circumstances - create a market - for electric vehicles, which makes them affordable for household users. It's about time we reduce the cost and burden of driving petrol cars and the fuel costs that go with it. And we're going to do this through, a $200 million infrastructure plan. Electric cars, people are interested in them and we need to get more being able to get brought to Australia for people to purchase, thereby getting the price down. But one of the problems is there's not enough charging stations, so what we're going to do is work with industry and work with state and local governments to put a network of charging stations right around Australia on our national highways, so people can actually seriously contemplate getting an electrical vehicle and be confident there's a charging station and we'll be happy to answer questions on that. There's also been a discussion in recent weeks as to whether or not we would use these Kyoto credits - and some of you have diligently been asking us about our position on this. We've come to the view, and Mark can talk about this in more detail, that we're not going to go down that path. Only Ukraine and the Australian Liberal Party are interested in using Kyoto credits. We want to be fair dinkum about climate change, not dragging the anchor and putting off the hard issues for another generation. For me this is a genuine policy to tackle climate change not a political patch up job by the current government. We need to do better than the last six years. This election's not just a test of who gets elected. It's a test of whether or not this nation can move into the future or remain stuck in the past. It's a test of whether or not as a nation we're fed up with the disunity and chaos, the inability of the current government to deal with climate change, and instead we make a decision that we won't let down future generations and that Australian politics can mend - that we can fix the six years of madness of the previous government and we can get on with actually taking real action on climate change. I’d now like to hand over to Mark Butler to make a few more points and then of course I and my team are more than happy to take any questions that you might have. Thank you.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY:  Thank you, Bill and thank you Alicia for hosting us here today. Today's announcements deliver on our commitment to future generations to protect them from dangerous levels of global warming and to chart a path for Australia to deliver on the commitment that we and all of the rest of the world's nations signed up to in 2015, to keep global warming well below two degrees. Today's announcements build on our comprehensive energy plan that we announced before Christmas - a 50 per cent renewable energy commitment by 2030, tapping into technology as Bill has said, like household batteries to bring down power bills for Australian households and much more besides. It also builds on the hydrogen policy announcement we announced in January that will also create thousands and thousands of new jobs, on top of the 70,000 jobs that independent modelling says will come with a 50 per cent renewable energy commitment we've made. Today rounds out our climate change action plan. We've put in place a policy that has responded to a range of business calls that we've heard as we've engaged with them over the last 12 months. Business wants us to work with the government's existing safeguard mechanism and we've decided to agree to that proposition. Not only will this make sure that business is able to work with systems they've been working on for the last few years but it also provides a platform for bipartisanship in the future. As does our commitment to working on the National Energy Guarantee. These are two of Malcolm Turnbull's signature policies and if the Coalition ever gets over its ideological opposition at the moment to climate change policy, there is a platform there for bipartisanship and for business certainty. We've also listened to a range of business calls to improve the safeguards mechanism, to open up access to international carbon markets that allow business to trade in those markets in the same way they trade in every other international market, to reinvigorate the carbon farming initiative, to expand access to land based offsets and a range of other things that business has asked us to do about the safeguards mechanism. We also want Australia to be back in the driver's seat in terms of the revolution that is sweeping the global vehicle market. Australia now has the lowest uptake of electric vehicles in the OECD.  New sales of electric vehicles in all of the nations to which we usually compare ourselves, is running at 10 to 15 times the EV car sales here in Australia. We're also the only OECD nation that does not have mandatory fuel efficiency standards, which means that not only is pollution skyrocketing on our roads, but Australian motorists are paying hundreds and hundreds of dollars at the bowser every year that motorists in other OECD countries simply aren't paying because of the fuel efficiency of those vehicles. So today's announcement gives Australian voters a clear choice. Australian voters are making clear that they want action on climate change. They've seen yet another angry summer. They've seen all the scientific advice that says if we don't start to take action, our children our grandchildren and generations beyond will be exposed to very dangerous levels of climate change that will severely impact the natural environment but also their living standards, and today the Labor Party is giving Australian voters that choice.

SHORTEN: Thanks Mark. As I said, Mark and my team are happy to take questions - I might start over here and I'll just come around.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, tomorrow's the Budget - there'll be about $15 billion or thereabouts in fuel excise in there, with EVs, they obviously don't use fuel, are you happy to see the take from the fuel excise go down or will Labor consider some sort road usage charge in the future?

SHORTEN: Listen, we're not touching the fuel excise but we do need to talk about an electric vehicle future don't we. For me, when I look at electric vehicles maybe 10 years ago I would have thought, oh that seems all a bit fantastic but I'm certainly a convert to that being a part of our automotive and climate future. It's estimated by the experts that by 2030 there will be three million electric vehicles on Australian roads. So the question is what we are going to do to help make it more convenient for people to move to that market. There's no doubt in my mind that the cost of living savings with electric vehicles is real. The question is what, if you know what the future looks like, good leading governments start designing in the present to help make us best equipped to be able to benefit from the future. I'm bullish about EVs for the jobs, for the local manufacturing opportunities, for the climate impact and also I think because of, it'll create technology and I'm going to get Anthony to supplement, it will create technology in Australia which we can then export. That charging station you looked at made in Queensland and it's being exported around the world. So I am very optimistic about what we can do here.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

SHORTEN: Well, I'm going to get Anthony to supplement him but before we start some government campaign about you know for every new idea is a bad idea. I think instead what we need to do is, do we want to be a country stuck in the past or a country joining the rest of the world in the future. I know Australians agree with me. They actually want us to move forward in considered ways but Anthony.
ALBANESE: There are some people in the Coalition do recognise what the future looks like and that's why Paul Fletcher announced in 2016 an inquiry into road user charges. I have put forward on behalf of the Labor Party two different people to form representation on that committee. It was viewed that there would be an eminent Australian appointed to chair it, that's up to the government to say who that was and then two people, one nominated by Labor, one nominated by the Coalition in order to have a bipartisan way forward. Guess what, the reason why you haven't seen that committee report is that it hasn't even been formed. We've had to put up two separate people because one person was waiting for 18 months ringing me once a month saying what's happening to the committee that I was being - that I was going to be appointed on. Since then there have been three Infrastructure Ministers, three or four people in charge of urban infrastructure. This is a government that recognised some of them, Paul Fletcher recognises something of what the future looks like, but aren't capable of even making baby steps forward. So perhaps your question should be directed to Paul Fletcher, or Angus Taylor, or Jamie Briggs or any of the other Ministers in the government who recognise that we need to deal with this issue and have been incapable of even forming a committee. People know what is happening in the rest of the world. There is no major car manufacturer anywhere in the world that is undertaking research into internal combustion engines. The whole of the world is moving forward. This government is stuck because they're incapable of doing that basic function of government.

JOURNALIST: Why not ban petrol vehicles then, the NRMAs are calling for that today, there are lots of European countries have done it, the NRMA wants it as soon as 2025. Why not just take that step and really drive the change?

SHORTEN:  Well, we think that this is an overdue first step. I am not going to start saying I am going to ban vehicles. What we are going to though is introduce proper emission standards in consultation with industry. Did you know we're the only country in the OECD that doesn't have a proper emission standards and all we're proposing is to look at the adopting the American standards which aren't even as onerous as the EU. What you'll get with my government, if I get elected is sensible change. What we will do is look at what is the rest of the world doing and then see what works for us. But what we won't do is keep scaring Australians that the world is too hard, the future's too difficult and that climate change is nothing that we can have an impact on. Mark?

JOURNALIST: The cost of that change Mr Shorten, now we have the final, I guess it's the final component of your climate policy. What is the total cost to the economy, what's the impact on GDP growth. What will the impact be on electricity prices. What will the impost be on business? Four parts.

SHORTEN: Four parts, I'll try and remember your four part question. I might get Mark to supplement. First of all, what is the cost of not taking action on climate change? It is huge. It was estimated that last year $18 billion was the cost of some of the extreme weather events we've been having in insurance and property values, in damage in lost production. There is a huge opportunity cost when we don't take action. We're confident by the sensible evidence-based, pragmatic and consultative policies we're putting forward that we can protect traditional jobs in steel, in cement, in aluminium, industries I've spent my working life representing blue-collar workers in. I am confident that with our fund to work with emissions intensive trade exposed sectors like that we can make sure that the changes for them are done in a way which protects those jobs. But I'm ambitious for new jobs in Australia. I don't want us just to be a job of financial service vendors or casualised, part time workers. I want us to have full time jobs in renewable energy. We've got the best scientists in the world so why on earth aren't we translating that to value added manufacturing. We've got some of the best resources of lithium in the world. We can put together, in Australia we have all of the parts for a lithium battery, so why can't we be a nation who says we want to step up and have more manufacturing jobs. I'm very - in terms of electricity we see that under this current government. Even in the last three years since they got elected the second time round, the price has gone up 20 percent. I don't know if it was you Mark, or someone wryly observed yesterday, it was observed yesterday that this $1.45 a week for pensioners, for a one-off payment total of 75 bucks. It's like a very small refund for their failure to do anything on energy policy in the last three years. I have no doubt that we will put downward pressure on energy prices. I might get Mark to supplement more about some of the economic growth argument.

JOURNALIST: Thanks Bill, well what's become increasingly clear here and around the world is that the old link between emissions growth and GDP growth has been broken by a whole range of technological innovations. The most authoritative modelling of the two emissions reduction targets, ours of 45 percent which was based on advice from the Climate Change Authority and Tony Abbott's of 26 was conducted for then Prime Minister Abbott himself and what that modelling showed from Warwick McKibbin, he said that under both targets over the course of the 2020s' real GDP growth will be around 23 percent. If anything energy costs under our target will be lower because there'll be much bigger drive into energy efficiency and there'll be a substantial positive impact on job creating investment under our policy as well. So there is no difference in real GDP growth over the course of the 2020s'. The difference though is that we're taking action consistent with expert advice about what is necessary to keep global warming below 2 degrees and minimising that damages build for future generations. On energy prices again it's been very clear on all of the modelling. That a substantial energy policy like the National Energy Guarantee will actually cut bills by $550 for all households, not just for those who might get the cheque under this election bribe announced yesterday. But for all households expanding renewable energy will put downward pressure on wholesale power prices, which will be lower under our target according to all modelling than under the much less ambitious target of the government's. And finally, in the vehicles area, we know on the Government's own modelling under Malcolm Turnbull's own modelling of fuel efficiency standards that motorists will save $500 per year at the bowser if we just bring our fuel efficiency standards into line with Americans. At the moment Australian motorists are paying the price for the Coalition party room's inability to agree on something as basic as making our vehicle fleet more efficient.

JOURNALIST: The 250 big business polluters that you expecting to have to buy carbon credits, how many of those credits are you expecting that they will have to buy and how much would that cost?

BUTLER: Well what we've announced today is that we will work with the government's safeguards mechanism, so there is no new policy. We're working with a mechanism that was introduced by Malcolm Turnbull and has been operating under Scott - sorry?

JOURNALIST: There's a new impact though -

BUTLER: -No, no there's not. There's a new target applied to it which will actually make sure that it does the work that big industrial polluters need to do to contribute to the national goal of bringing down emissions. But there's no difference to the way in which the mechanism currently works. Last year for example, big industry polluters or big industrials had to surrender about 450, 000 carbon offsets. That's under Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison's plan and that's the plan that we're going forward with as well. Now we've said after hearing the calls from business that they would prefer to work with the government's existing mechanism. We've said that we would work with them, if elected in May, on the trajectories between now and 2030 on the way in which baselines would operate for individual sectors and individuals companies, on the arrangements that would apply for emissions intensive trade exposed industries - and we've heard their calls that those arrangements should be based on a comparative impacts basis which has been something they've been very strong on. And as I said earlier, we've also heard their calls that they want access again to international carbon markets, which inexplicably, Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison have cut off. I mean Australian business is able to trade in every other robust credible market on the planet. Why are they not allowed to trade in international carbon markets? The Liberal Party has not been able to explain that.

JOURNALIST: But can’t you say before the election what the impact will be on steel makers and aluminium smelters in Australia? Why can't you say before the election what will happen to them?

BUTLER: Well what they're going to do is they're going to be required, as the current mechanism is supposed to require them, to reduce their emissions -

JOURNALIST: By a lot more though -

BUTLER: - how much they're able to do that requires detailed discussion and experience over the next 10 years.

JOURNALIST: You want to reduce emissions by 45 per cent or by -

BUTLER: The overall industrial sector is going to have a target of reducing their emissions by 45 per cent on 2005 levels -

JOURNALIST: So what does it mean for a steel - what does it mean for the steel maker?

BUTLER: Let me finish, David. And what we've said is that we will work with individual sectors to make sure that their baselines are appropriate sector by sector. We've also said that we would put in place a $300 million strategic industries fund that will work with industries, particularly the strategically critical industries like steel, aluminium, cement and suchlike, to chart a path to a low carbon future - as is happening all around the world. In all of the economies around the world that want to make sure that steel, aluminium and cement are able to continue as a critically important part of their economy while reducing their carbon emissions.

JOURNALIST: That's a guarantee? We will still have existing steel and aluminium makers in Australia?

SHORTEN: Yes, David. I can't guarantee what companies make their you know, other decisions unrelated to this. But I've spent longer than I think most people in Canberra, working with the steel industry. I've seen the job losses which have happened when you've got poor investment decisions and you got a lack of government support. But I also know that what the steel industry wants - and there's two large steel makers in Australia - what they want is policy certainty. I know the companies that you are asking about rhetorically. They are sick and tired of the Coalition chaos. They are sick and tired of having three Liberal Prime Ministers, 13 different energy policies. They know that they've got to compete globally. The extension of the safeguards mechanism isn't a big issue for them because they're already covered by Malcolm Turnbull's, I should add. And what we've done, unlike the current Government, is we're providing a $300 million fund to help work with them. Big industry is so far ahead of the Coalition Government, it's not funny. And you must speak to some of these people privately. They know that reducing greenhouse gases, getting carbon pollution under control - they know it has to happen. What amazes them is that you've got such a dysfunctional Government that as soon as you mention the word 'climate change' in the Coalition, they rush out the back to have a civil war. Sorry I did say we would go this way so I'll start up there and come back to you, Katharine.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask, with the electric vehicles, logic tells you that would put pressure on baseload power in this country (inaudible). Do you have any discernible idea of what that may be and whether or not you will need a fair more amount of coal in the future?

SHORTEN: Okay, I'll let Mark answer that.

BUTLER: What you'll see now in our policy announcement today is a target for 50 per cent of new sales by 2030 to be electric vehicles and we'd see that, you know, trending up over the course of the 2020s. The electricity sector agencies, like the market operator for example and our big electricity companies, are already very across this issue. This is an issue that is being dealt with by countries all around the world, to deal with the impact on the electricity grid. Now in Australia, if anything it's likely to be less than other countries because of our extraordinary levels of rooftop solar. So a whole lot of the purchases of electric vehicle will be plugging their vehicles straight into their own micro-generation on top of their roof, probably with a battery as well. So I'm very confident having talked to electricity sector agencies, companies here in Australia and looking at overseas experience that this is entirely manageable.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) carbon credits for Kazakhstan. What controls, quality control do you have over those international (inaudible)?

BUTLER: I'm not quite sure whether Scott Morrison or Malcolm Turnbull read the Paris Climate Agreement they signed this nation up to. But in the Paris Climate Agreement, there is a market for carbon credits established that we are proposing Australian business have access to - both as a purchaser and a seller. There are enormous opportunities for Australian carbon offsets, particularly from the land sector, to be sold into this market which is going to have huge demand from big emitters like China. So this is a market that Scott Morrison and Malcolm Turnbull signed Australia up to. It is obviously a market that is going to have to be credible and robust and all Australian governments, Liberal and Labor alike, will be watching that. But they have not answered the question: Why can Australian business trade in every other robust international market except a carbon market? And the only conclusion you can draw is the Coalition allergy to anything that involves the word carbon.

JOURNALIST: On the vehicle emission standards, you're going to put the onus on car dealers rather than the manufacturers to meet them. How will that sort of work in practicality? Will it be a case of dealers having to keep paperwork and if I'm going to go and buy a Land Cruiser, will the dealer tell me no, I've got to sell you a Prius because of government regulation? And secondly, Mr Shorten on tax - on the budget. If the Government wants to get its tax cuts through Parliament this week, will you support that?

SHORTEN: Listen, if you want to buy a Land Cruiser, you still should. That's up to you. But I'll get Anthony to answer the rest of the issue and then I'll come back on tax cuts.

ALBANESE: What we're doing on emissions standards is moving to the U.S. standard which is 105 grams of CO2 per kilometre. That is not onerous. What that does is just move us into the world. The whole world has emission standards except for Australia. And guess what? Manufacturers are way, way ahead of this Government. That's the point. Have a talk to Mitsubishi, or Toyota, or BMW, or SAAB, or any of - Hyundai - have a look at and talk to any of the world's producers and what they will tell you is that they are advancing into the future while Australia is just left behind. And what we also will do with this policy is have an opportunity for Australian manufacturers. We just saw the plug in over there in the car park, whereby the generator there is produced and manufactured here. Science produced the idea here, it's being manufactured here, it's being exported. There is opportunity by embracing the future. What there is, is just cost if we're left behind. And I repeat what Bill has said, that at the moment, Australian drivers are paying $500 dollars more per year than they should be because of this Government's failure to have any emission standards.

SHORTEN: Sorry, you're next - Katharine and then you. Will we vote for tax cuts that we haven't seen this week? Depends what they are. But I also want to put on record, we've already got bigger, fairer tax cuts for nearly 10 million working Australians. Last year, the Government offered people $500 up to $90,000 income. What we did, because of the serious economic reforms we're making; winding back unsustainable tax treatment of some classes of investment, what we're able to do is already offer people who earn up to $90,000, nearly a thousand dollars in refunds. So in the first three years of a Labor Government if we get elected, married couple, one on $65,000, the other on $90,000. They're going to get nearly $6,000 back. So my first question when I look at the budget, is  the Government going to match our tax cuts? And then we'll have a look at what they're proposing. But another thing, let's call it what it is tomorrow night: What new idea is this Government going to do in the next six weeks that they couldn't do in the last six years? This is not an economic document, it's a political leaflet by a Government asking you to forget the last six years of division and disunity, and they’ve magicked up the money and it's all going to be forgotten with all the bad things and the disunity of three Prime Ministers and 13 energy policies. So yeah, sure. We're attending tomorrow night but I think like many Australians, the scepticism level is high. Sorry, Katharine and then over here.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the reason we don't have a vehicle standard in Australia at the moment is in part because powerful interest groups have prevented one from being implemented for the best part of 15 years. Your policy is not clear about when the new vehicle emission standard is set to take effect. Also you are in terms of industrial pollution you're saying you've got a 45 per cent emissions reduction target but you're going to consult with businesses about their baselines and trajectories. Agriculture is out of these curves all together, can Labor guarantee that you'll be able to deliver a 45 per cent economy wide drop in emissions by 2030 given that your own policy is heavily caveated at this point. And also, ahead of the election, would you as the Government has done, release a carbon budget so that Australians are aware what level of abatement you are factoring in in each sector of the economy. The Government has done it, will Labor do it?

SHORTEN: Alright, Mark is very keen to answer your question, Katharine so I will defer.

BUTLER: I think it's very generous of you Katharine to say that the Government has released a carbon budget frankly. There are a few bar graphs that say maybe there will be technological innovation here and then there's Kyoto carry-overs there. Well, the numbers don't mean much frankly, they're attached to meaningless columns.

JOURNALIST: Will you produce meaningful numbers then?

BUTLER: What we've done is produce the most comprehensive climate change action plan before a federal election that has ever been released here. It has gone sector by sector with policies that either set specific targets in the case of the energy sector and the big industrial sector or a range of policies to drive down pollution tapping into technological innovations like the vehicle sector. Now, going to your point, there are some details that business would not want an Opposition or expect an Opposition to finalise from Opposition. There are some details about the way in which baselines are set, emissions intensive trade exposed arrangements for example that are best settled in government if we were to win the election with the resource of the agencies and the ability to sit down with business in a proper engagement process. But what we've said is clear, is the basic policy framework, for example for the industrial sector and the emissions reduction target that will apply to that. In the area of fuel efficiency standards for vehicles what we've also said is that we will sit down with industry and automobile associations to put in place a proper phase in period for those standards to get as Anthony said, to the 105g standard that is the target in America and will do that on the basis of maximising the savings to motorists there. Now, there was a Climate Change Authority report as you'd know that was delivered to this Government in their first year of office that had a phase in time-frame to get to the American fleet standard but it was supposed to have started two years ago so obviously we can't just simply pick up a report and wind the clock back two years, we've got to think about a phase in time-frame that recognises we've lost five years here because of the Government's inaction, chaos and division.

SHORTEN: Hang on, I did promise you next.

JOURNALIST: Actually that was covered off on that question but actually on the land sector, so there's no target for agriculture? You don't know anything about the compliance for companies under the safeguard mechanism so how are you going to drive the purchase of abatement from the carbon and land sector?

SHORTEN: Alright, we're very bullish about carbon farming initiatives, we do thing Ag has a role to play but we're going to do it with them, we're not going to do it against them but I'll get Mark to speak further.

BUTLER: What the land sector and the big industrial sector have both said to us is that the carbon farming initiative which was a failed Labor Government initiative needs reinvigoration. All of the budget was cut from research and development into new methods of cutting farm pollution by Tony Abbott so for five years this is a sector which has had no money going into research and development for new methods of cutting farm pollution. We'll reinstate $40 million to find new methods of cutting farm pollution for farmers, for traditional owners, particularly in the north of the continent and for the forestry industry. That's exactly what they've asked for and the big industrial polluters who need to tap into this market have asked for as well. We've also said that we would put in place protections that safeguard the land mark reforms around broad scale land clearing over the last two decades in Queensland and New South Wales to provide that baseline protection for our remnant vegetation and high value regrowth. That will be based on the Queensland reforms that were just put in place by the Palaczszuk Government, so no additional reform for Queensland per say, but spreading those best practice reforms across the country. And then finally in the agriculture sector, we'll work with sectors like the meat and livestock association who already have a commitment for their sector which is responsible for the majority of agricultural emissions for their sector to be carbon neutral by 2030, this Government has not gone near them since that industry made that commitment. We will put in place a $2 million fund to build a strategy to deliver on that commitment.

SHORTEN: Hang on, we've been going a fair while here, I've kept a count of the questions, there has been 20, admittedly four of them from Mark and five from Speersy. I want to hear from a couple of people who haven't spoken. I know, this is the way we want to do it.

JOURNALIST: Is it fair that farmers have to pay for the rehabilitation of that land in those clearing laws you mentioned?

BUTLER: These are a landmark reforms put in place by Labor Governments lead by Peter Beattie and Anna Bligh in Queensland and Bob Carr in NSW during the Howard Government. Because John Howard recognised that the only way to meet our first commitment in the Kyoto Protocol period was to bring an end to the broad scale clearing of remnant vegetation and high value regrowth. So these are land mark reforms that have been put in place that were paid for under government structural adjustment packages over the last two decades and we simply want to safeguard, we simply want a safeguard.

JOURNALIST: But the question is whether it's fair that the farmers have to be responsible for that or whether the Government should subsidise them to clear their land.

BUTLER: Well I'm not sure whether I quite understand that question. I mean, the land clearing regulations have been in place now for a couple of decades. They are reforms that need to be protected so that everyone has an understanding of what the baseline is. Because without a baseline you cannot build a robust credible carbon farming market that will open up a whole range of new income streams for farmers, for the forestry industry and for traditional owners. Drought proof income that will allow them to the source that income and remediate their landscape in the meantime. But to do that you need to have credibility around broad scale land clearance.

JOURNALIST: Has Labor done any modelling on the impact of this policy on the price of vehicles and particularly the price of Australia's two most popular vehicles the Ford Ranger and the Toyota HiLux? And has there been any modelling also on the availability of vehicles? Will people be able to buy the vehicles they want at the price they're currently paying?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, until you get a government who is committed to introducing electric vehicles into Australia, some of the cheaper models which are manufactured overseas won't be available here. We're going to change that, it's called the laws of supply and demand. And what we're going to do is create a market, a market for vehicles which are more fuel efficient, which are more friendly to the environment and it'll take time, it'll take time. But remember back in 2007, only about 7,000 households had solar rooftop. No doubt, that if you'd been there someone might have asked the question well you know will that be too expensive or can it be done. 2 million households are there now. The question I've got is and someone asked earlier about is it fair, is it fair that because the Coalition is so dysfunctional on climate change we hand on a dud deal to our kids? How far is it, that we push off all the tough issues, push off all the reforms to other generations to clean up our mess? Labor doesn't take that. This climate change policy is a point of real difference. Labor is not retreating from the inevitable onslaught of the knuckle draggers of the right wing of the Coalition. I'm not like Malcolm Turnbull, they can't give me orders. My orders I take are from the Australian people. You know, if the Government were worried about climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. We are pleased that climate is an election issue. We are pleased that we are actually backing in some of our international commitments. We are pleased with a policy which will protect existing industries but support the creation of new industries. We are pleased that we can reduce the cost of living through energy bills by investing in renewables. We are pleased with the take up in the future of electric vehicles. Tomorrow won't see a vast change in the type of cars on the roads. But if we assemble here in a decade's time if we are successful at the next election, our car fleet will look different and it will be more accessible and there will be more jobs. So, very good to see you all, we'll see you again tomorrow and the next day and the next day. But climate change for Labor is a matter of first order importance, we put forward our policies, we look forward to debating the Government because the voters of Australia want real action on climate change from their major political parties and we're offering that today.

ANDREW GILES, MEMBER FOR SCULLIN: Morning guys, I am Andrew Giles the federal Labor Member for Scullin. I'm really pleased to be here today, on a Sunday morning at Repurpose It, with my leader, Australia's next Prime Minister Bill Shorten and also our environment spokesperson, Tony Burke and of course Kim Carr, our spokesperson on industry and research. I'm really excited that Bill is back in Scullin, I think for the seventh or eighth time but I am more excited that we are here today to discuss a policy announcement that is really revolutionary. Something that is building on the great work that's happening here at this great recycling plant to create a greater vision for recycling and the sort of country that we'd like to live in. So Bill, I'm really pleased to have you here today.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Andrew, I want to thank our hosts here to show us what Australia can do when we set our minds to becoming a recycling power. For me, today's announcement is all about answering the question what sort of country do we want to leave to our kids and our grandkids? Will our kids and our grandkids get to see some of the sea life which we're able to see. Will we leave a more damaged environment for our kids and our grandkids? And I think it's long overdue, the last six years, for Australia to say we're not going to follow the pack when it comes to recycling. We're not going to follow the pack when it comes to a war on plastics. We're not going to follow the pack when it comes to handing on a better environment to our kids. My niece who's 18 years old lives up near Nudgee Beach on Moreton Bay in Queensland. She told me a couple of weeks ago she came across the third dead sea turtle on the beach that had been washed up this year. This was a fabulous sea turtle, I think it was called Hope, it was a well-known sea turtle in the local water environment. But when they opened up the stomach of this dead sea turtle, which had lasted the best part of a century, it was full of plastics. And what happens is that these sea turtles eat these plastics. It makes it harder for them to deep dive, to find the nutritious food that sea turtles need and of course floating up on the surface it makes them much more vulnerable to sea craft. Another dead sea turtle it lasted 90 years but it couldn't survive the current problems we have with recycling and plastic. We've got to make sure that we preserve our sea life, marine life for the future and that we're a lot better at recycling all the materials that we use in our modern world. Something like 90 per cent of all sea birds have plastic in them. A third of all the sea turtles around the world are dying from plastic poisoning and consumption. So we have a problem, we have a problem globally. We have a problem with plastic waste in the Pacific Ocean and we have a problem in Australia, that we're just using things once and then we're discarding it. This country can't afford to be that unsustainable. We've fallen behind the pack. We're not doing enough as a nation. Individuals, families, councils, businesses they're all trying to do their bit to challenge plastic use, single use plastic bags and the microbeads but not enough has been happening. This country is falling behind when it comes to the challenge of recycling. So that's why I'm pleased to announce today that a Labor government if elected, will declare a war on the use of single use plastic bags and microbeads. We want to - there's been a lot of talk, the time for talk has finished, It's now the time for action. The community expects leadership from the national government. I'm going to get my colleague Tony Burke and my colleague Kim Carr to outline what we're going to do to become a much better nation at recycling. But the leadership needs to start now and it needs to start with us. We've got a great plan, we're going to have a National Waste Commissioner, we will have a national recycling fund, we will have a national container deposit scheme, we're going to contribute $15 million to tackle marine pollution in the Pacific Islands. We've got a range of exciting ideas along with our ban on single use plastic bags by 2021. This is an exciting time, the community wants leadership on recycling. They want leadership on plastics. They want leadership on making sure that we pass on a better deal to our kids and our grandkids. They don't want to see more of our valuable and precious marine life washing up on our coasts poisoned. I'd now like to hand over to Tony Burke to talk further about this exciting initiative and then Senator Kim Carr about how we're going to create jobs and an industry around recycling like we've seen here today with a very forward innovation of this very good company.

TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT AND WATER: Thanks very much Bill. Every piece of plastic you've ever used if it wasn't recycled is still on the planet somewhere. Every straw you've ever used is still on the planet somewhere. Any bottle top, if you live in one of the major cities or anywhere near the coast, if you threw it in the gutter or you saw someone throw it in the gutter, that's now in the ocean and it's been mistaken for food. We - it is estimated now that by 2050 the plastic in the ocean will weigh more than the fish in the ocean and looking down the barrel of that we have a situation now where we can't go any longer with each level of government saying it's someone else's fault. Local government, state government, federal government everyone buck passing saying it's someone else 's responsibility. That's why if elected a Shorten Labor government will establish a Waste Commissioner to have someone who is charged with saying you've got to bring the parties together, local governments, state governments, federal government, industry because we can't keep living in a way that is throwing more and more pollution into the ocean, into landfill, in a way that's not sustainable. What Bill described for sea turtles is true of fish, it's true of sea birds and ultimately - you know the whole idea when plastic was first introduced it was boasted about that it was indestructible. Well yes, that's also the problem and we need to take the lead on dealing with this. So we will finally get federal leadership from a Shorten Labor government if elected and with the Waste Commissioner we will set 2021 a ban on single use plastic bags and microbeads. We'll also look at beefing up how the product stewardship - Stewardship Act is used. This legislation was put in place back when I was Environment Minister and under Don Farrell we set up a recycling scheme for televisions but it stopped there, it hasn't been used beyond that. We need to make sure that we extend it to deal with batteries, to deal with microwaves, to deal with white goods. You have and where we are right now is a classic example of saying hang on, these products aren't simply waste they can also be inputs for the next layer of industry. That also means we can provide, instead of relying on the rest of the world to determine how our recycling goes which is where we have been to start taking the lead on it ourselves. We also want to make sure that Australia plays its international role. A whole lot of the waste that is in the oceans, including waste some of the waste that drops onto our beaches particularly in northern Australia has come from other parts of the world. That's why the international engagement both for the countries producing the waste and countries in the Pacific where plastic waste has had a massive impact on communities that rely on the ocean for their sustenance. We can make sure Australia plays its critical role. So in short we end up with a situation where we play our role in recycling, where we have a Waste Commissioner providing federal leadership, getting around the problem that's plagued us for years where it was always someone else's fault and where on the world stage Australia becomes a nation instead of relying on someone else to solve it, where we're playing our role on making sure that we can't continue down this headlong path to where by 2050 as I say the plastic in the ocean weighs more than the fish. I'll hand over to Kim Carr.

SENATOR KIM CARR: Thank you very much Tony, it's a great pleasure to be here today, to be part of yet another announcement demonstrating that a Shorten Labor government will show real leadership when it comes to dealing with environmental policies that will provide this country with real jobs, new jobs able to make the best uses of our science, the best uses of the technologies and make sure that blue collar workers are very much part of the future of a new sustainable industry policy in Australia. Now we talk a lot about sustainability in industry but we haven't done much when it comes to actually changing the way we do business. Now, Repurpose It, the company we're here today with have shown us what can be done. Shown what can be done in terms of working together with different levels of government, the scientific community, the best technology that's available and redeveloping resources so they can be reused because things are too precious just to throw away. It's too important for us to be able to treat our resources in the way that we have been and smart manufacturers know that. Smart manufacturers know that there is a lot of money to be made, new jobs, new industries to be created by repurposing resources making sure that we are able to create the sorts of jobs that we need for the future. So it's a great pleasure to be able today to be a part of this announcement, the $60 million that we're announcing today allows a national Labor government to work with local government, state governments, with industry, with the universities, with the science agencies to get the very, very best out of our capabilities to secure the jobs and the industries for the future and to give real meaning to sustainability when it comes to manufacturing in this country. This is about making sure that blue collar workers are very much part of climate change policies in this country.
SHORTEN: Thanks very much, I should have just thanked our hosts Repurpose It, this is a remarkable business success story. A few fairly bold individuals decided to back their savings on a new way of doing business, recycling contaminated soils and building waste and what we see now here is 40 direct jobs, 30 contractors, 150 indirect jobs from one business and I think that if we understand that recycling and our war on single use plastics - it's good for the environment, it's good for the world, it's good for our kids and our grandkids and it's good for jobs. That's how Labor sees it,  leadership looking after people, looking after our environment and doing what as parents we are all fundamentally DNA hardwired to do, which is hand on a better deal to the ones who come after us than what we received. Any questions on this?

JOURNALIST: Under your plan will Australia be able to recycle all of it's recyclable material and not send it offshore?

SHORTEN: I will get Tony to supplement this, the reality is that other countries, we can't rely on other countries to take our waste in the future like we have in the past, so we have to do more. But we are part of the globe, everything is interrelated. What we're very committed to doing though is working with Pacific nations to help clean up the oceans but I'll get Tony to supplement a bit further.

BURKE: The government undertook some targets when they had no pathway to get there one of those targets was for 100 percent of packaging to be recyclable and 70 percent of it to in fact be recycled by 2025. The challenge was the government then offered no pathway as to how they would get there. It was set in the target and magically it would occur. By establishing a Waste Commissioner and by having the money there for the industry development, within Kim Carr's portfolio the intention is to do two things, one, you want to be able to reduce use, you also want to be able to look at what products can be made of compostable, bio-degradable material as well. But then the second thing that you want to be able to do is to build up industry so that we are not only dealing with our own recyclable material but potentially there will be other countries in the region that would turn to us.

SHORTEN: One thing which we haven't directly addressed is that we intend to set targets for the Commonwealth in our use of recyclable products. We believe that we can use the power of government to help set the best example and even on a project like this, the reality is that it's the Commonwealth that helps roll out road projects, we should be requiring that they use more recycled materials in the construction of new roads. So there's a great deal we can do, some days you look at the problem and you think it's too overwhelming but I'm a big believer that if you get everyone together those insurmountable mountains seem to shrink in size and we're able to get a lot more done.

JOURNALIST: So you think you can deal with all of our recycling waste in Australia by doing what you’re doing?

SHORTEN: Well we've got some COAG targets, we want to see that 70 percent of Australia's plastic packaging will be recycled or composted by 2025. We want to see that 30 percent of our recycled content will be included across all packaging by 2025. I'm not going to give a deadline when we can do exactly what you say but unless you set ambitious stretch targets you're never going to get there. So we are absolutely committed for the federal government to step up and join households, businesses, communities in our war on single use plastic bags for example. On our commitment to create a recycling industry which is world class.

JOURNALIST: The European Union's just voted to ban all single use plastics by 2021, so going further than what you're announcing things like earbuds, straws, that type of product. Why not follow the European Union, if they can do it why can't we?

SHORTEN: I'll get Tony to supplement but you know as a general principle we are open to what the EU is trying to do but we're also conscious of unintended consequences. Quadriplegics might need plastic straws to consume liquids, so we're just conscious that we've got the goal of wanting to remove single use plastic but we've also got to be careful that there are particular groups, or particular examples that we haven't thought of and that there's an unintended consequence but Tony is right across this, I'll get him to supplement.

BURKE: The EU has been way ahead of Australia in this field and in Australia until this announcement today there has been no attempt to say we will - that the federal government will be the one that provides the full leadership here. This is a fundamental shift today from what previously has been bouncing between states and local government with occasionally businesses like the one that we're at today deciding on making a commercial decision that they'll take the lead even though governments provided them with nothing. For example, if you buy a television set, it'll be filled with Styrofoam, packed with Styrofoam. You buy an almost identical television set in Europe. It'll be packed just as safely but with recyclable material - probably coming from the same factory. So Australia has been way behind, the sorts of changes that you've pointed to are changes that are only possible once you have federal leadership and one of the reasons for establishing the Waste Commissioner is so that you've got somebody charged with bringing all of that together. So in terms of are we there on the first day that we decide is going to be federal leadership able to catch up after years of neglect from the federal government, with where Europe's already at? No, not on the first day but in terms of the direction and making sure that Australia is no longer a pariah when it comes to recycling, when it comes to recyclable material then yes today is a turning point.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, when will voters get details on your climate change policy?

SHORTEN: Very soon, very soon indeed but let me just remind voters of what we've already said. What we have already said is that our goal is that 50 percent of our energy mix by 2030 should come from renewables. What we've already said is that we're committed to the Paris targets, the international convention to reduce our carbon pollution emissions by 45 percent of 2005. We're committed to by 2050 we'll have zero net emissions. We've also said in what I think is exciting for consumers and households that we want to see the roll out of more batteries in people's households. Did you know that over two million Australian households already have solar rooftop installed on their roofs? People do that, not for decoration but because it really makes a difference and I think a lot of Australians when they talk to their friends on the weekend who have solar would like to actually move down that track themselves. One of the missing links in helping Australians get lower power prices and also take individual action on climate change has been how do you store that energy if it comes at the daytime when you're home at night the washing machines on, the kids have fired up the computers, every appliance is going that's when you need that energy. That's why I think as battery technology becomes more sophisticated, more slimline, more effective, then I think we're really in a sweet spot to take action on climate. That's why we're proposing to roll out 100, 000 battery installations for households who earn less than $180,000. Plus we've got other measures for renters and people who don't own their own home. So we've got a fair bit on the table. We've also said we want to modernise our energy infrastructure, a $3 billion dollar fund to help with the interconnectors to make sure that we can get the energy where we need it in our national energy market. So I think we've actually got a bit out there but I promise that we're going to have a lot more in the very near future.

JOURNALIST: What about Kyoto carry over credits (inaudible) can you say much on that?

SHORTEN: Well we've certainly been considering that question and this is a particular accounting technique which only the Australian Liberal Party and the Ukraine use, a lot of other nations have turned their back on it. We'll give a decision on that very soon. But certainly as I'm aware it's only the Australian Liberal Party and the Ukraine proposing to use these carry over credits that I am aware of.

JOURNALIST: The government is today announcing one off payments for concession card holders to help with rising power prices (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Listen, it's about $1.45 a week, a one off payment for 12 months you get this cheque in the mail. This government though seems to think that energy prices only go up in election years. So, do I think $1.45 a week for 12 months, it's better than nothing but it' not an energy policy, $1.45 a week for 12 months is not an energy policy it's an election con. Does anyone think you'd even be getting this if we weren't six weeks before an election? I suppose one good thing about it is the fact that the government is offering $1.45 a week to pensioners for 12 months, $75 for single pensioners, it shows that the government knows that they don't have an energy policy, that they want to pretend to have one. Well, it's a con and I don't think anyone is fooled by it. Everybody knows when it comes to energy policy what you need is a long term plan. You need long term certainty. Today's announcement is the exact opposite. I mean if this government really want to lower energy prices and action on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister of Australia. See he proposed a measure called the National Energy Guarantee which Labor is willing to take up, the benefits of that are that it was apparently going to reduce your house bills - your energy bills by about $500 a year. But the current government scrapped that and instead are offering people something far less so I think that the people will be the judge but is $75 useful, sure it is but as an energy policy and doing something about energy prices that have risen 20 percent since this government was elected, it's just a drop in the bucket.

JOURNALIST: Federal Labor said that if elected it wishes to put a woman into the role of Governor General. How that has any, or what impact on Mr Hurley?

SHORTEN: Sorry I missed the very last part of that?

JOURNALIST: What impact will that have on Mr Hurley?

SHORTEN: Oh well, no. The government's nominated the New South Wales Governor to be Governor-General we accept that's happened but I think that the next Governor-General after that should be a woman. I mean there are dozens and dozens of candidates. The fact of the matter is that we should have more women in senior positions and I think it's common sense if I say that if we get the opportunity to appoint a Governor-General I'm going to appoint a woman.

JOURNALIST: Even if she's not as good?

SHORTEN: Oh, I don't buy that Scott Morrison argument that the only way women should get ahead is if it's not at the expense of a man. I put it a different way for the last hundred and twenty years why have so many good women missed out and men been appointed instead?

JOURNALIST: To take you back to this the container deposit scheme when would you envisage that being introduced and would you be modelling it on say, South Australia's how would that work?

SHORTEN: I'll get Tony to answer that question.

BURKE: That would be worked through the Ministerial Council with the help of the National Waste Commissioner. We're serious about wanting to get the consultation through on that. Each of the systems that's in place has a level of merit. The problem is for industry, if you don't have a consistent way of dealing with it then if they're trying to run a business off the recycling and the feedstocks all prepared to a different level you have a real challenge. So that's something that will be worked through the Ministerial Council and so I'm not going to set a deadline on it but I'm confident that we get there relatively quickly.

JOURNALIST:  Would you expect those states to have the national container deposit scheme? We're working on the basis that it's opt-in and on an opt-in basis we want to make sure that we get over that initial challenge, that we have, which as I say is where if you're trying to set up a business to do the actual recycling not just to do the collection then everything at the moment is prepared to a different grade.

JOURNALIST: So how do you convince states like Victoria who have so far resisted a container deposit scheme. What do you have to do to get them over the line?

BURKE: Work on the basis the merits of the argument.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Chris Bowen said that if elected a major economic statement would come out in the third quarter. What do you have to say to this?

SHORTEN: Chris is right. The reality is that this budget which is being brought down on Tuesday it's a political document. Normally budgets are brought down in May, the government is going to bring down a budget early in the hope that they can get you to forget about the last six years and in the next six weeks promise you stuff they haven't done in the last six years. But of course the nation needs to go on, there will be an election if Labor is successful we will bring down a Budget in the third quarter of this year. Chris is saying it's a major economic statement, that's spot on.
JOURNALIST: It's not far away is Labor really ready for it though?

SHORTEN: We're ready. We're ready because we're stable. We're ready because we're united. We're ready because we have a more talented team. We're ready because we've done the policy work. We're ready because we understand that everything in Australia is going up except workers’ wages. We're ready because we need to undo these cuts to hospitals and schools and TAFE's and childcare and universities. We're ready because this nation can't afford another three years of inaction on climate change. Today this government's roster rushed out an election con, $75 for pensions that's nice but that doesn't make up for six years of rising electricity prices. It doesn't make up for increases in the cost of living, it doesn't make up for the increase in the cost of seeing a doctor or a specialist. We're ready because we've done the work. We're ready because we're united and we're ready because this nation needs a vision. Today we're backing in blue collar industry by backing in recycling. Today we're backing and taking long term action for our kids and our grandkids because right now as we speak those single use plastic bags and microbeads are killing our marine flora and fauna, it's just a disaster. We're ready because this nation can't afford another three years of the six years of disunity of the Liberal Party.

JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on Eddie McGuire's comments yesterday about Cynthia Banham?

SHORTEN: Yeah, listen I know Cynthia and Michael I thought those comments were devastating. As I understand he had no idea about the identity of the person throwing the coin and so he has made clear that he apologies and if he had any idea about the circumstances he wouldn't have said it. But nonetheless, the words have been said I am sure that like all of us, he wishes he hadn't said what he said.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask another recycling question, sorry you've broken a record here. Obviously the industry particularly in Melbourne hasn't had a great run in the last few years with some fairly devastating fires. How do you ensure that the industry, if it's to grow, grows in a way that isn't going to put the community at risk?

SHORTEN: I'll get Kim to supplement but you've got to have good environmental health and safety, you've got to have good occupational health and safety. I think there have been lessons learned. Having said that we can't ever compromise safety. What I like about this plant, for example, is that if you look at where it is geographically it's got a big buffer zone, so even though the suburbs of Melbourne are expanding this is a big footprint. It only used 80 of its 150 hectares, there's 1200, there's a buffer around the area. So I think good planning makes a difference but I've got to stress to Australians we need to tackle recycling. I guess I'm like a lot of Australians who take your waste, your household waste down to the transfer station. You do your best you can in your own home, you put your recyclables in one bin and your food waste and your other in the other bin. But we know that councils are struggling, like the status quo isn't working. Ask anyone who takes their rubbish down to the tip. Ask any construction company trying to sort out what it does. We have the level crossings here you and have to use all of that recycled land and you've got to move that soil and so we need a plan. And again it was interesting we had Earth Hour last night and I don't know how many of you had kids who made you turn off your electricity for an hour. Kids get it, our kids get underestimated. People think they're just on computers and they're just on social media and not thinking about the future. The kids now expect the adults to do more on the environment, to do more on recycling. It's up to us we can't just let them down. Kim, if you wanted to supplement?

CARR: Thank you. Traditionally these issues have been regarded as matters for local government or for state government. We have to change the way we do business in this country. That's why we're saying there has to be national leadership. Now we have to work with state and local governments to change the way we do business. We have to change the way we do business, not just at the individual level and Bill's outlined how each and every one of us have responsibilities but each factory in this country has a responsibility. We're going to make sure that in that process, that working people don't pay the price for it. We've got to make sure there is a just transition and make sure that the economic prosperity that we know this country has, is actually shared and maintained and that all the technologies that we know determine modernity are able to be maintained but to do it properly. And we know that we can do that if we have the proper policy framework and that's what Bill Shorten’ offering - national leadership where we actually set about dealing with problems and not just trying to push them away, let someone else worry about them. And I'm absolutely convinced that the sort of problems we've seen in Melbourne can be dealt with and we can make sure the sort of hazardous fires we've seen in Footscray, with those sort of - quite clearly the rogue operators are driven out of the industry and that decent people, ethical practices are followed and that we ensure that proper industrial practices, the best science, the best technology, proper ethical practices are maintained. That proper political leadership, that's what's needed in the country and that's what Bill Shorten is offering this country.

JOURNALIST: On a final separate note if I can. There are advocates on the steps of Parliament today to advocate for victims of sexual abuse who want change to the National Redress Scheme. How is Labor moving towards that, would it support such an indication?

SHORTEN: Yes I would. First of all to those survivors and their supporters I accept what you are saying. That the Royal Commission made recommendations on redress and this current government didn't go far enough. Now, we were left with a complex choice, do we vote against what was put forward and wait for something better. Or do we get on with some form of redress? So Labor nailed some of our concerns that we would like to improve if we form a government but we still wanted to see some of the compensation some of the redress start now and I think on balance people agreed with that. But what I'm not going to do is tell the survivors and the advocates that this current government properly implemented the Royal Commission, because it didn't. One example, only one example of this is that the government said cap the compensation for survivors at $150,000 and the Royal Commission recommended $200,000. To people sitting at home you might say, oh well that's not much of a difference. Let me just say back to you to explain the case of survivors, none of them want compensation. They would just rather that this never happened to them. But if you are going to have compensation it seems to me, appropriate that we go with the Royal Commission best practice rather than try and second guess the lives of survivors and there's a number of other similar amendments we would seek to make. The difficulty of course, we would have to negotiate with states, got to get all the institutions and religious institutions on board. But I'm prepared to try and improve the deal. But what I wasn't prepared to do is hold up any deal whilst we sought the better arrangements.

JOURNALIST: What would be the first thing on our agenda if you were elected on this matter?

SHORTEN: Well we will talk to the advocates, we want to get on with how we could create a consensus to improve redress.

JOURNALIST: Truck drivers are protesting across the country today, what would Labor do to help reduce the truck (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Well, one of the issues about reducing the truck road toll, is better roads. The other issue is of course fatigue, I fundamentally believe that if you pay truck drivers smaller rather than better rates for driving their trucks it creates unsafe circumstances. This current government denied the link between low rates of pay and poor safety but I live in the real world. The reality is that if you’re getting a rate of pay to carry a load from one part of Australia to another part of Australia and that rate doesn't meet your living costs, you might be tempted to drive faster, you might be tempted to take some pharmaceutical assistance to keep you awake for the long distance driving. In other words, I believe that there is a correlation between an unsafe rate of pay and a lack of safety. And this isn't just about truck drivers, it's about all of us who use the roads and our families who use the roads. So there's got to be a better way. So I do believe in safe rates of pay. Now the previous mechanism was one which didn't work as was intended so we are going to have to work on what that looks like but health and safety is everyone's business. And if you pay people very poor rates of pay you will have an effect on health and safety. And that's not just the drivers, that's everyone. Heavy vehicle collisions are a problem it's a real issue. It's not a theoretical debate on the roads it's a matter of life and death. Alright everyone thank you very much.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I spoke to Australian Muslims who are over here, who lost family - that's what's touched me. The murder of 50 people, it's got repercussions, there are Australians who have lost loved ones, and perhaps I hadn't stopped to think about that before I actually met people from Melbourne, and elsewhere who had family who were murdered here. I think the other thing which I really feel very strongly about, is not only the murder of 50 innocent worshippers, but it was an Australian who did this. And that has been a common comment I've heard from a lot of Australians. This is not, that's not - Australians are ashamed that this person was an Australian. And so, New Zealand is our nearest friend, that's why we're here.

JOURNALIST: You began your day with a visit to the Al Noor Mosque, one of the two mosques targeted in the attack, you left a floral tribute as you know, thousands of people have done throughout the past fortnight. What did it mean to visit that site this morning where dozens of innocent worshippers were killed?

SHORTEN: The mosque is set opposite a park, it's in a quiet area. People should be able to live in quiet neighbourhoods and worship their god without a deranged terrorist killing them. What struck me is that it's a very peaceful area. When we think of this sort of violence, we think perhaps of battle scenes in the Middle East, we don't think it's possible - and New Zealand is very similar to Australia. So to see that sort of violence and hate in a suburban, quiet, tree lined street - it's horrible. You just, what must those people be thinking when they were just at Friday lunchtime at church.

JOURNALIST: Just finally the New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has earned widespread praise from across the globe for the way she responded, her leadership, the way she comforted the family members of the victims in the day after the attack. You were there at the service, you saw the way that New Zealanders responded to Jacinda Ardern's presence, the standing ovation. How have you found the way that the Kiwi Prime Minister has handled the aftermath of this tragedy?

SHORTEN: I've known Jacinda for a number of years, I think she's doing an outstanding job. For those of us in public life, and when you watch someone put in such a significant global performance like Jacinda, you sort of say, you hope that we in Australia could step up in the way that she has stepped up. New Zealand are rightly proud of Jacinda Ardern's response, and I think she is the right person for the times here in New Zealand, and I think there's a lot of goodwill towards her. It's a reminder to us in Australia, that when we let the better angels of our natures and political debate, when we try and bring people together, it leaves everyone feeling better about ourselves as Australians.

FIONA MCLEOD, CANDIDATE FOR HIGGINS: Thank you for being here. It's a great delight to welcome back again Bill Shorten to the wonderful seat of Higgins. And we're here this morning talking trade and apprentices at the fabulous Holmesglen TAFE, there is around 40 trades being taught here and many more across TAFEs across Australia. Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks. That was Fiona McLeod Labor's candidate for Higgins and I'm accompanied also by Jennifer Yang, Labor's candidate for Chisholm. I'm here at Holmesglen TAFE to pay a bit of respect to the Australian tradespeople. Holmesglen TAFE does a great job as one of the pre-eminent TAFE training facilities in the nation. The kids here and indeed the adults here who are studying, they're doing the right thing by the country. They're bettering themselves, they're getting trades which will carry them right through their adult working lives. But trades and apprenticeships are under attack under the current Federal Government. Don't worry about what this government says in the next five weeks before the election. Worry about what they've done in the last five and a half years since they got elected. They have a shocking record on vocational education. The number of apprenticeships in Australia has fallen. It was 420,000 before the Abbott/Turnbull/Morrison government. Now it's south of 280,000 and declining. We are a tradie nation - 1.6 million Aussies have a trade qualification - but the average age of our tradespeople is going up and we're not replacing the tradies. So Labor is determined to repair some of the cuts that have been made. We're determined to get more people thinking that apprenticeships are a viable option. I say to adults thinking of retraining, I say to parents wanting to put the option of apprenticeship on the table for their teenage children, vote Labor in five and a half weeks’ time, six weeks’ time. Vote Labor because we're going to pay for 100,000 apprenticeships - the upfront fees. We're going to require that wherever there is a Commonwealth construction project ,or Commonwealth money that 1 in 10 of the people employed are apprentices which encourages great small businesses to put apprentices on. We've set up a $100 million regional TAFE construction fund to make sure that our young people are getting the greatest opportunity to learn on 21st century equipment taught by great TAFE teachers. Today for example, we're announcing $1.5 million for Holmesglen TAFE, so this very good facility can get the upgrades it needs and deserves. We are determined to make sure that Australia is yet again a tradie nation. Labor is the party of TAFE. Labor is the party of apprenticeships and we're going to help with the cost of living pressures on apprentices and those who want to do a trade. We're happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: You talked a lot about Australian tradies - there's a lot of international tradies here getting a qualification but they say they can't work, as they can't get apprenticeships afterwards. Are we doing enough for these people who come into our country to learn a trade and fill a gap in the skill shortage?

SHORTEN: Well, international students are a very important part of Australia's economic future. We should be training people all around the world. But what we've also got to do is train locals as well. So our policies have no impact on the international students who are coming here. But what I need to do is remedy the crisis in trades training which the Abbott/Turnbull/Morrison governments have created in Australian apprenticeships. But let's call it as it really is - talk to anyone who works in the TAFE system, the TAFE teachers, the people who work in TAFE. They have been battered from pillar to post - funding cuts, privatisation - really we owe a debt of gratitude, not just to the people doing their apprenticeships but to the people who are teaching them. That's why, we've said that we're going to reverse the privatisation of public TAFE in Australia. We're going to reverse the privatisation of vocational education in Australia. We're going to say that at least two in every three dollars that the Commonwealth spends on vocational education, needs to be spent in public TAFE. So that's our plan. International students still absolutely welcome. My priority of course will be to make sure that we're giving our own people the best opportunity to pursue a trades future.

JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that no one in Labor has ever offered to influence Australia's laws while speaking to a lobbyist about political donations?

SHORTEN: Not that I'm aware of. But I think your question goes to that amazing footage last night - I don't know many of you stayed up and watched it, but it was compelling television. This video footage of these One Nation leaders travelling to America reminded me of that old show, Minder, on British TV - the British TV show, we had Arthur and Terry, they were always on the make. That was Arthur and Terry out there, in America representing Australian politics, and what a joke. Saying that they've got the proverbials of the government in one hand and for 10 or 20 million dollars they'll deliver eight Senate seats. One Nation is a circus and anyone who watched that video footage last night, you almost had to have your fingers over your eyes but you're peeking through still to watch the train crash which is extreme right wing politics in this country. Anyone who watched that video footage last night of two leaders of One Nation basically selling Australia's gun laws to the highest bidders, the National Rifle Association of America - anyone who watched that footage would know that you should put One Nation last. Why won't Mr Morrison put One Nation last? Why is it that the more, the worse the facts come out about the leaders of One Nation raising 10 and 20 million dollars, or trying to, from American gun lobbies to influence the Australian lawmaking process - why is it that the worse the facts get about One Nation, Mr Morrison is determined to do nothing about them. I mean really.  Mr Morrison said yesterday in a big sermon on the mount he said "oh one nation's abhorrent" but Mr Morrison are you going to put them last? "Oh no I won't do that." How abhorrent does a political party's conduct have to be before Mr Morrison will put the nation's interests ahead of the political interest of the government.

JOURNALIST: Just on that, Labor has announced that they'll be preferencing One Nation last on how to vote cards, will you also be telling One Nation not to preference you above the Coalition in Queensland?

SHORTEN: Listen One Nation know what we think. Sorry we are going to put them last, and like-minded parties full stop. You know, and I know One Nation wants to preference the government. But they're essentially saying to the current government if we don't get your preferences then we will punish you. Well One Nation frequently threatens to put Labor below the Coalition. That's up to them. I don't care what they do. Just remember that video footage - if you ever want to talk about how this country should not be run, turn on that footage of these One Nation characters. On a racing term they’d be called colourful identities, colourful racing identities - they've travelled to America, showing values and views when they thought that no one could see them which are really not the values and views of Australian politics. You've got to ask yourself, what more does Mr Morrison need? He says they're abhorrent. You saw that video footage. It's incredible. I couldn't have written this stuff. And I don't think anyone here could have imagined it - selling out the Liberal Party's greatest pride and joy of the last 30 years, John Howard's gun laws, saying they've got the government by the proverbials and then saying for 10 or 20 million dollars I'll get you eight senators who will do what the gun lobby wants.

JOURNALIST: What do you say to Pauline Hanson's conspiracy theory that Port Arthur was a conspiracy to deprive Australians of their guns?

SHORTEN: I just think that's – has she said that? Really? Oh lord. That's just, people died there. That was a shocking, shocking act of evil. I have no time for that view. What we need to get out of Australian politics is the extremism. I get that Mr Morrison doesn't like all my policies, I certainly don't think he's been good for apprenticeships but I don't equate him with One Nation. But what he's doing, every day he lies down and you know just as supine in front of One nation he's tainting the Liberal brand. We don't need the extremists. The vast bulk of the Australian people are either a bit to the right or a bit to the left. Most of them are not extremists. I've spent my whole life standing up against extremism in the left and extremism in the right. I need the Liberal Party to go back to being the Liberal Party they once were. The Liberal Party once upon a time would have known what to do, they wouldn't have needed a focus group. They wouldn't need advice from the Queensland Nationals, they would have just said this is right, or this is wrong. Mr Morrison needs to be the person that the Liberal Party once were and put One Nation and like-minded parties last.

JOURNALIST: If One Nation are that bad why should a government accept their vote in the Senate? A Coalition or a Labor Government for that matter?

SHORTEN: They'd get elected, the challenge is not to have them elected. I mean part of this problem really goes back to Mr Turnbull doesn't it when he wrecked the voting system in the Senate where he created optional preferential voting which meant that small parties didn't even need to get the votes they used to have to get, to get in. So what we see is the fracturing of consensus. There's a reason why people don't like Australian politics and are disillusioned because they think politicians carry on like those two characters did in America "we'll scrap these laws, give us $10 million or $20 million". Politics should be better than that, I'm not saying Labor gets it right all the time, I'm not saying the Liberals don't get it right, but I've just got to say to the Liberal Party, this is a case where you either put the nation's interest first or your interests in a couple of seats.

JOURNALIST: But is there a moral question there? If they're not good enough to be worthy of any support in an election setting but morally can a government accept their vote once parliament is sitting?

SHORTEN: For us that's a bit of a hypothetical, they vote 90 per cent of the time with the government. So I tell you what we don't get a lot of votes from One Nation but that's not the issue here is it. The issue here is that you've seen two leaders, you know, Senator Hanson's right hand man and her left hand man - this Steve Dickson who I'm not sure was a household name certainly is now, he's their number one candidate for the Senate. Going to America saying "G'day how are you? Listen you can get eight Senators in Australia if you give us $10 million or $20 million". That is such a cynical, crass act that the Liberal Party just needs to say hey we're not part of this show. Because the longer you hang out with them the harder it becomes to distinguish yourself from them. The standard you walk past is the standard you accept.

JOURNALIST: There have been times when the ACTU and I think sometimes possibly activist groups have said put the LNP last. They certainly did that in Queensland in Longman. It's a very simple message obviously but it doesn't mean putting One Nation last. Would you be disappointed if the unions used that language now? Put the LNP last?

SHORTEN: The unions are independent of us. Having said that you know my clear view and I've stated it to union leaders is yes, I know that traditionally you say you put the LNP last, but I think One Nation's performance in recent times and that Fraser Anning, I think they have to be put last. And I will say this again, I would rather see Labor's preferences go to the LNP first rather than to the One Nation Party and that might not always be in my interests and maybe One Nation the political leadership will seek to punish me for this. Well, I'll have to put up with that because at the end of the day I'm a student of history. When you allow the extremists in the room, when you tolerate the hate speech, when you turn a blind eye to that political you know, selling out of Australia then you're not upholding the standards, you're actually part of the problem.

JOURNALIST: George Christensen spent a lot of time outside the country, more time in the Philippines I think than he spent in parliament he concerned about his overseas trips?

SHORTEN: Listen, what he does in his own time is his own business. But I am concerned that an Australian politician, a member of the government from north Queensland spends 42 weeks in the last four years overseas. Like the Australian worker gets four weeks annual leave a year. Mr Christensen seems to have pioneered the 11 week annual leave condition in the Australian workplace. That is not how politicians normally do it. What he does in the Philippines that's him but what worries me is what he's not doing in north Queensland. It sends a message that somehow everyone's you know out to lunch, they're not. I do think that he owes an explanation to the people of north Queensland and I do think Mr Morrison needs to spell out does he condone a member of his government taking 11 weeks off, or 70 days off, every year?

JOURNALIST: Will Labor be seeking to strengthen Australia's gun laws?

SHORTEN: We will always look at proposals to improve our gun laws. We don't have specific proposals but having said that, we're not about to weaken them.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of reports this week that Scott Morrison in 2014 proposed getting $9 billion for internment camps for people overstaying their visas and that sort of thing. Is that something that you think the Prime Minister of Australia should be promoting?

SHORTEN: No I don't, I was surprised like a lot of people to hear about that $9 billion on detention centres- internment facilities. But leave aside the policy, what that tells you is that this government is leaking on their current Prime Minister. We didn't know this. The only way that story could have emerged to the light of day for everyone to learn about it, is that Mr Morrison's colleagues are telling stories about Mr Morrison. Yet again, as this Coalition Government limps towards the next federal election the Coalition Government of Mr Morrison, the Liberals are addicted to disunity. They can't kick the habit. They're just too busy fighting each other to worry about the people.

JOURNALIST: You've got the Budget next week do you expect to see income tax cuts in that Budget and what would a fair budget look like for you?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we've got, Labor is offering nearly 10 million Australian workers bigger, better, fairer, tax cuts. A married couple under our tax cuts, Mum might be earning $65,000, Dad might be on $80,000, under Labor in our first year they'll get nearly$6,000 back in our first three years of office. So that's bigger than anything the government is offering. So I think the government needs to look after working people, but if they're looking after working people it's not just tax cuts. I think they need to unfreeze Medicare Rebates so that the out-of-pocket costs of seeing a doctor decline. I think they need to have a wages policy reverse the penalty rates cuts, look after the workers, look after millions of Australian wage earners who have got wage stagnation. I also think they need to do more on energy policy to get the energy bills down that means embracing climate change and embracing real action on climate change. So we'll look at the Budget for that but I think there is a question which Australians are entitled to ask themselves when they hear this Budget.

JOURNALIST: Should Morrison -

SHORTEN: - Sorry, this is the one question they need to hear. What is it that this government's going to miraculously do in the next six weeks that they didn't do in the last six years? And if it's such a good idea why didn't they do it in the last six years and why did they pursue corporate tax cuts for business, $80 billion, $17 billion for the big banks for the last three years and waste the nation's time?

JOURNALIST: Would Labor support another round of income tax cuts, so do you think that there's any justification for them?

SHORTEN: We'll need to see what numbers the government bring down in their Budget. What we've got to do is make sure that the budget's sustainable, we've got to make sure that we reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals. I think it is appropriate to look at tax cuts for our working people in this country but also we need to help reduce the national debt. So there's a trifecta of priorities, look after the services so we've got a bright future and a good safety net. Look after working people with a better and fairer tax system and also make sure that our economy and our Budget can sustain whatever ups and downs that the world may throw at us.

JOURNALIST: Labor wants to boost super contributions to 12 percent. Is it a good idea considering that wage growth has stagnated?

SHORTEN: We think that we need to increase contributions so people don't retire poor. Of course, it's always up to what the economy can manage. Our number one priority of course is to reverse the cuts to penalty rates. The reality is that most people who had their penalty rates arbitrarily cut in hospitality and retail earn $30,000 and $40,000 a year. This is the worst possible time to be cutting the spending power of working Australians. In the last four years, corporate profits have gone up 45 per cent but wages have only gone up eight per cent. When you look around the world our productivity growth in the last few years is second only to Denmark in the OECD but our wages growth is 27th. This country is not working in the interests of millions of wage earners, in the interests of small business, in the interests of farmers. What we've got to do is not just look after the top end of town as this Government's tried to do for the last three years with massive business tax cuts. And of course, if they got re-elected they'll be back, those business tax cuts will be right back on the table. We've got to put the economy back in control of everyday Australians. That's why we're backing in TAFE so strongly today.

JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on the move by the PM to plunge $500 million on NDIS providers ahead of the Budget? The ABC understands that it will happen on Friday or Saturday.

SHORTEN: Well, Budgets are normally in May but this government knows it has to have an election so it's going to rush an early Budget and they're just going to hope this budget holds together by rubber bands and sticky tape and ice cream sticks for the next five weeks. They don't want scrutiny on this Budget. So what they're going to try and do is after five and a half years of wrecking the system they are going to pretend in the next five weeks they can magic up this money like a unicorn and make it all happy as if the last five and a half years didn't happen. The NDIS is a great idea. People with profound and severe disabilities and their carers though need to be at the centre of the system. This government put a staff cap on the National Disability Insurance Authority workforce, which meant that not enough people were available to help people as we rolled out the scheme. I don't believe this Government's done enough to put people with disability and their carers at the centre of decision making. So, is it good that there's some more money put into the system? Of course, but what you've got to ask why are they doing this emergency patch up five weeks before an election. This is a government who hasn't done enough on disability. They're hoping that carers of people with disability forget the last five and a half years in the next five and a half weeks.
JOURNALIST: Will Labor offer financial incentives to energy companies that slash their greenhouse gas emissions?

SHORTEN: We'll have more to say about our climate policy in the near future but just to remind you some of the good things that we're already doing, we've said that we want to move to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. We've said that we want to reduce our carbon pollution greenhouse gas emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. We want to be at zero net emissions by 2050. One of the ways, and I articulated it today, is that we want to also encourage the rollout of the use of access to renewable energy for households and small businesses. So we’re going to put some incentives in place to install batteries. We'll have more to say about the rest of our policies in the very near future.
JOURNALIST How is Labor going to address the concerns of Chinese Australians after Michael Daley's remarks in the New South Wales election campaign?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, Michael Daley is no longer the leader of the New South Wales Labor Party. So I think he's stepped down, I think New South Wales Labor has shown that it didn't agree with the remarks and they shouldn't have been said. But beyond that going forward Labor has got an exciting set of propositions for all Australians including the Australian Chinese community. Jennifer Yang is one of my key advisers she's running in Chisholm. Labor is fielding more Chinese Australian candidates as part of our line up for election than we ever have before. We've got a great candidate running in Menzies as well against the long-serving Kevin Andrews. So we're putting more candidates forward. We're also going to work on the provision of community language education for example. There's a whole range of benefits and of course when we give bigger, fairer, tax cuts that benefits all Australians including those of Chinese extraction. When we improve our school funding when we improve our hospital funding when we improve our Medicare funding, when we improve our action on climate change, when we improve our TAFE funding, when we lift the penalty rates of people who've had them cut. We have got a package which is good for all Australians including Chinese Australian citizens. Last question?

JOURNALIST: Could I put a question to Jennifer about Michael Daly's comments. I don't know whether you've commented about what Michael Daley was recorded to have said in New South Wales. I realise it's another State but does that cause any grief for you here in Victoria? Does it influence people's opinions of Labor and what's your response to what Michael Daley said?

YANG: Thank you for your question. I'm sure a lot of people feel disappointed to hear such comments but I also understand Mr Daley has apologised for his comments and I think now is a time that we move on from that. But again, like Bill just said whenever we hear anything like this we should stand up and call it out and I'm glad he apologised for his comments. We, myself as well if I heard anything that this, especially any kind of extremist or hated comments I think it's up to anyone, all Australians to stand together, stand up, call it out. I think that's the only way we can really unite our community together. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks everybody, lovely chat.

SAM CROSBY, CANDIDATE FOR REID: Hi everyone. Thanks everyone for coming, my name is Sam Crosby, I'm Labor's candidate Reid at the federal election. Firstly I'd just like to say thank you to Lion for hosting us on this tour. I'm sure you've all enjoyed their products over many years but they're fantastic employers. They employ about 200 people right here in the electorate of Reid. So sincere thanks to them for having us along. We're joined by obviously Bill Shorten, Kristina Keneally and Brendan O'Connor here to talk about the next instalment of the wages policy. A little while ago I was the Concord branch president of the St Vincent de Paul Society, and we would go out and would see people and we'd give them help, we'd give them electricity bill help, or grocery, health or whatever happened to be. And every week that you'd get the electricity bill in the mail it would be an inundation of people coming and asking for your assistance. And it never ceased to amaze me that the people you'd go out and see, would be double income families or sometimes triple income families - they've been working two or three jobs and they couldn't afford to make ends meet. And that's why today's announcement is so important, because it helps those people. I'll hand over to Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, that was Sam Crosby, Labor's candidate for Reid in the upcoming federal election in about 45, 46 days. This country works best when everyone gets a fair go. Not just the investment banker working in a skyscraper office, but the cleaner who cleans the investment banker’s office at night time. But the problem in Australia is at the moment is that for millions of Australian wage earners, they're experiencing wage stagnation - record low wages growth. When millions of wage earners are experiencing low wages growth - nobody wins. Now, the government, the Liberals, they're proud of their economic architecture which is delivering low wages growth. They think this is a good thing, and they think they shouldn't do anything about it. Labor has a completely diametrically different view on this. If wages growth is low, well below corporate profits, well below productivity increases, then the system’s broken. We don't think it is good enough to see record low wages growth in Australia. But only Labor has a plan and a wages policy to tackle it. Today I'm pleased to announce, that Labor wants to see the minimum wage be a living wage, and Brendan O'Connor is going to speak about that in a moment but just a reminder of the other features of our wages policy. One, we want to reverse the arbitrary cuts to penalty rates for those people in hospitality and retail who've had their Sunday and public holiday rates cut without anything to compensate. We have our tradie pay guarantee - we want to make sure that small businesses and contractors stop being ripped off by dodgy bigger companies who don't pay them the money they're due for the work that they've done. We're very committed also to ensuring the people get the same pay for doing the same job. Casualisation, labour hire, it's a big issue in Australia. Nearly four million people work casual. Nearly a million Australians hold down two jobs. The problem is that labour hire workers can do work with the same skill and capacity as in-house workers, But because the legal identity of the employer's different they get paid far lower. This is unfair on them and it also undermines the job security of the permanent workforce. We're also going to clamp down on the visa rorts to make sure that when guest workers come in from overseas they're not being exploited, not working at bottom dollar- ripping them off but also undermining the job security of other permanent workers. But today as I said we're unfurling the next stage of our wages policy, making sure the minimum wage of $18.93 per hour, making sure actually it should be a living wage. Now, I'll get Brendan to talk further about this new announcement and then happy to come back and take some questions.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Thanks Bill, and thanks Sam. It's good to be here at such a good workplace. Unfortunately however, there are workplaces around the country where people are receiving income and they're not really making ends meet. And as Bill has outlined, there's a combination of ways we need to respond to low record wage growth. In fact it's the lowest wage growth on record and we seen no redress, no response by the government other than to support the ongoing cuts to penalty rates, and the Finance Minister I think made admissions recently to say that the low wages was a deliberate design feature of the economic architecture, which effectively means that the government likes to see wages low - well Labor doesn't. Profits are up and productivity is up in most sectors of the labour market, and that's good. But wages are flat lining, prices are up, household expenditure is rising, out-of-pocket costs in health areas, energy prices are skyrocketing, and yet there are so many people struggling to make ends meet, and something has to be done about it. We have to do it in a number of ways, and today, we want to see the minimum wage be lifted to a living wage and for that reason we've announced changes to the law, if elected, that will provide the authority of the Fair Work Commission to examine all the factors, but  put to ensure that people need not live in poverty, to ensure that we have a safety net, one that allows people to live decently, to pay for the bills, pay for the essentials, and not be struggling so acutely to make ends meet. Recently this week we've seen the highest number of Australians needing more than one job to make ends meet. We've seen high record underemployment - we've got over one million Australians that cannot find enough work, and we've seen as we’ve said, low wage growth. Well, the commission will be charged with the responsibility to hear submissions from employers, from unions, from experts, from community groups to define the living wage, and the commission will also be responsible about the timing and the scale of that increase. This is about ensuring that everyone receives the benefits of economic growth, that we are the country of the fair go only if we ensure that everybody is provided a dividend in that growth. And to date, we're not seeing that happening. So this is an important policy, it's part of an array of policies that Labor has announced to address job insecurity and address wage low growth.

SHORTEN: Thanks Brendan. Are there any questions on this or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten, 97 per cent of employers in this country are small and medium size. How can you be confident that this policy of lifting the minimum wage won't hurt their viability?

SHORTEN: Evidence. The evidence is that lifting the wage actually will help stimulate economic growth. The reality is that when millions of wage earners are not experiencing wages growth everyone does it hard. Very recently 124 of Australia's most senior professors and doctors of economics in an unprecedented newspaper advertisement actually put an ad out saying we need to get wages moving. No less a figure than the Governor of the Reserve Bank. They said, the single biggest problem is low wages growth in this country. If people aren't getting wages growth what's happening is they're spending more of their own savings to make ends meet, and you see confidence contracting. The reality is that corporate profits in Australia have gone up 45 per cent in the last four years but wages have only moved by eight percent. Some people are doing very well and a lot of others are missing out. Or to pick another number which I think also tells a story - productivity in this country in the last few years, has gone up four times the rate of wages growth. Internationally, other than Denmark, Australia's productivity growth is second best in the OECD, second best, but our wages growth is only 27 out of a pool of 35 nations. So Australians are working hard, the problem is they're not getting their fair share. The United Kingdom recently increased their lowest wage by 22.5 per cent, and they saw an increase in employment. But what we are saying, and what Brendan outlined, is that there's two stages to our living wage approach. One is, we get everyone in the room together with the independent umpire. The employers, all the economists, the representatives of workers unions, the social agencies the people who see where real disadvantage is in our community and that process will come up with a number. But then there's a second stage under the law which Brendan's outlined. We get that you've got to roll this out in a way which recognises the capacity of business to pay. So this is not a crash through or crash approach to wages, not the scaremongering we get from these lazy dilatants in governments who don't care about wages growth. This is sensible, it's measured, it's consultative but it's going to a fundamental truth. That this country can't just be a country where the top end do well and everyone else struggles. You know this country works best when everyone gets a fair go. When it's not just the investment banker in the skyscraper getting the increase in profits but it's the cleaner who cleans that office at the night time where no one sees them working on the low wage - when that person gets a fair go too. The big challenge in Australia, Philip Lowe knows it from the Reserve Bank, small business, big business, the banks, everyone knows it, households and family knows it. Under the Liberals, everything goes up except your wages. The system isn't working properly and we have a plan to fix it in the interests of everyone.

JOURNALIST: While the corporate profits are up further the endless question for some of those smaller businesses you know maybe their profits aren't going up by 45 per cent so the issues of what they can afford would be real. In your changes to the law would the Fair Work Commission still take into account the state of the economy, the profitability of small businesses or other businesses so the sustainability of the increase would actually be a factor?
SHORTEN: Yes - I feel like just saying the answer to that question is yes, but just to repeat – and I might just Brendan to supplement it. What we're proposing is two steps, the first step is for the commission to determine what a living wage is but I do issue the polite challenge to people here, do you all want to live on $18.93 an hour as an adult trying to pay your mortgage, look after your family? It’s too low but the commission will work that out, that's why we haven't put a number. They'll consult the experts, this is not a new and radical process, it's just an overdue process. It's getting back to the traditions of Australia where you get everyone around the table. But then there is a second stage and that's why you know, I appreciate your question and Emma's because it is at the heart of the matter. The government will run a scare campaign and say that unless we're paying millions of people no wages growth at all somehow others miss out, that's not right. What we'll do in the second stage is very clear. Is that the commission will have the capacity to consider the timeframe over which improvements to wages growth should be phased in and they'll be able to take submissions and hear evidence. I've been negotiating win-win outcomes for workers and businesses my whole life. Wages policy, I never thought we would see such low wages growth in this country. It really is the lowest on record. It's not a great ad for the current government. But did you know - if you've got the time to do it but you don't have to worry because we have - they've made 21 wages projections whilst they've been in government, their budgets and their documents. 21 times they've made a wages projection and it's been too high. These guys in the government don't know what's going on in the real world. Every time they've promised in the budget wages growth here, it hasn't made it. But maybe Brendan could again supplement go through the evidence process it's very important that people see what we do is reasonable and moderate but it is about on the principle that a fair go for everyone is in the interests the nation.

JOURNALIST: Just one more for you sorry, Mr Shorten. Do you regret calling employers "fat cats" because you would know many of whom were offended by the comment?

SHORTEN: I think if you look at the actual quote that's not quite the context and I haven't had that view. This government loves to say that if you want wage rises for wage earners that somehow you're a class warrior that couldn't be anything further from the truth. I've understood for the last 30 years that for every worker to have a job there's got to be an employer who gives them a job. You heard me in there talk to that marvellous manufacturing operation at Lion Nathan. Now they're a bigger business but the cooperation and teamwork there to me is an exemplar. There's not a high turnover workers here, this is a good job. But in part, it's a good job because it has longevity because the workers in the company have worked together. This is a world class manufacturing facility. Next time we hear someone say Australia can't make anything send them down to Lidcombe to have a look here. You've got teamwork, you've got operators on lines making decisions. So I do believe in co-operative workplace relations. In fact, what we're proposing today on the living wage is all about cooperation. Currently, under this government, they have the mistaken view that you can only have corporate profits or wage rises and not both. They have the mistaken view that the only way that you can have jobs growth is to have a fractured casualised labour market where you've got millions of people having to do a second job just to make ends meet. This government is out of touch. They actually don't care if you don't get a wage rise, I do. So we'll work it cooperatively, it'll be an evidence-based process. Maybe I'll just let Brendan explain further how cooperation, cooperation, cooperation. But we've got to solve the wages problem in this country and the government are just out of time and out of ideas. O'CONNOR: As Bill said we're going to make sure this is a responsible approach, an evidence-based approach. We're going to ensure that employers and unions and community groups and experts make submissions to identify firstly, what the living wage is and that will be a determination of the Fair Work Commission. That's the first thing David, but the second thing, of course, is ensuring that it's done, introduced responsibly so as to have regard to affordability, have regard to the economy and indeed have regards to employment. And look the counter case is important too, the fact is anaemic growth in our economy affects small business. When people don't have decent wage growth then they're less likely to consume, they're less likely to buy goods and services off small businesses. We need decent wage growth, that in turn will contribute to consumer confidence and business confidence. Otherwise what you see is an impact on aggregate demand in our economy. We've see a reduction in consumption which will lead to difficulties for small businesses. We know this, that low paid workers indeed low and middle income wage earners spend almost all of their income in our economy and therefore we need to make sure that they get a decent wage outcome. That can be determined having listened to the evidence by the Fair Work Commission and also it allows employers to put the case that certain amounts may be too difficult to deliver. They'll put the case if there are affordability issues, they'll have every right to make those submissions and they will be listened to and they'll be considered properly by the independent umpire when the Fair Work Commission is making that decision.

SHORTEN: Some other questions?

JOURNALIST: On a living wage policy, how would it affect the business like Tooheys that is actually owned by a multinational?

SHORTEN: First of all if you're paying well above the award it's going to have no impact. The point about here is they’re actually getting wage rises. But the reality is that not every company is structured like this business. Let's talk about our labour market for a second. Did you know that nearly four million Australians are in casualised work, labour hire, contract work. In other words, they don't have the certainty of a permanent job. We are in danger of creating an American style underclass in our workforce. Did you know that wages growth is the lowest it's been in 60 years since they've kept records. How does a family hold it together - do you know this morning there will be families who've got a weigh up how they afford their kid's school camp. Do they have enough money? Do they have to do that extra shift just to make ends meet? There'll be people weighing up can they continue to afford you know, their health insurance. People are doing it hard in this country, not everyone is doing well. I think Australia works best when we work together. You know going back to Emma's point, I don't have a view it's us versus them or them versus us, but one thing is for sure, corporate profits some people are doing very well and that's great. That's what you heard when we addressed the workforce. But a lot of other people you know, the energy bills, they out-of-pocket costs to be able to go and see a doctor. So some people are already doing well this is no threat to them. But for a lot of Australians, this means they might be able to start making plans rather than watch their household savings diminish.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten are you satisfied with the Coalition’s response to the One Nation-NRA story that's around today. Should they be added to the Fraser Anning censure motion?
SHORTEN: I think that the shocking video footage of One Nation operatives travelling to America and conspiring with the National Rifle Association to raise money to undermine Australia's gun laws, I think that is shocking. This is now a test of Mr Morrison's leadership. How can it be anything else? Mr Morrison needs to make clear: not only does he like and defend our gun laws, but will he put One Nation last. I mean they have been caught out. One of the things I think the Liberal Party can be rightly proud of was John Howard's gun laws. But to see a party who may receive the government's preferences caught out on video boasting about taking money, watering down Australia's protections, trying to Americanise our gun laws. What more does Mr Morrison need to show some spine and put One Nation last?

JOURNALIST: What Michael Daley said about Asian-Australians, do you think those are appropriate comments for a Labor leader?

SHORTEN: I said yesterday, no I don't. And I said not only are they not appropriate to say, no one should be thinking this. So I think he's actually done the right thing and stepped down, showing some recognition and acceptance of the result on Saturday. And I'm confident that the Labor Party in New South Wales will regather after Saturday and start the process of rebuilding.

JOURNALIST: But will the comments do damage federally in the election?

SHORTEN: Listen, I wasn't running for Premier, neither Gladys or Michael were running for Prime Minister. I think the federal election will be decided on federal issues. But let's not shirk the point, It wasn't appropriate, they shouldn't have been said. And Mr Daley has now done the right thing.

JOURNALIST: Did you pressure him to stand down?

SHORTEN: Listen, New South Wales Labor ultimately made the decision. It's ultimately Mr Daley's consideration. He was the one who made the final decision. I did make clear though they shouldn't have been said, those comments in any circumstances.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the One Nation video - it was more than just touting for money, it was what they were going to do with it, which was to undermine - seemingly - the electoral process?

SHORTEN: Listen if I didn't make clear how strongly I was horrified by what I saw, let me be very clear:  the idea of One Nation political party operatives going to the United States, seeking millions of dollars, promising to water down gun law protection in Australia, that was absolutely horrifying. I think it was a betrayal of the Australian political system. What are these right-wing extremists thinking? And I just have to say to Mr Morrison - at one level it would inconvenient and half your party in Queensland want to cozy up to One Nation and maybe in other places. After that video, let's be clear: sometimes in politics you have no choices. There is the right thing to do and you just have to do it. I'm surprised, he should just simply say they're going to put One Nation last. I cannot understand why you would not want to put One Nation last when they been filmed actively conspiring with the American gun lobby to take millions of dollars, to introduce American gun laws into Australia boasting that they can buy eight Senate positions. What else does Mr Morrison need to hop off the fence and do what he should have done beforehand?

JOURNALIST: There was a ban on foreign donations that went through the Parliament. There’s always debate about further changes to donations law and maybe the One Nation video does highlight that. Would a Labor Government make any further changes to the way elections are funded, the way the donations laws work now?

SHORTEN: I think we need a lot more transparency. Here is three changes; they've got to be made in real time, any amount over $1,000, the identity of the donor must be disclosed and we need a national anti-corruption commission. This government could do that next week. They are so divided. This government is addicted to disunity. They cannot kick the habit. And the problem is the nation’s being put last and their own interests and their fighting each other first. But this One Nation video, I would not have - If you had told me it happened and I haven't seen the evidence, even though I am no fan of the right wing, I wouldn't believe Australians would behave in that way, but they clearly have. Mr Morrison now needs to lead. This is not a Liberal or Labor issue. This about the integrity of the Australian democracy, the integrity of our gun laws, the integrity of our political system.

JOURNALIST: Should One Nation be censured along with Fraser Anning?
SHORTEN: We will consider that. I have, to be honest, I hadn't looked at that angle but we will consider that.

JOURNALIST: Should Steve Dickson stand aside, he is the lead Senate candidate for Queensland.

SHORTEN: That's right, he is the lead Senate candidate. I forgot - listen, One Nation is a circus. They were dangerous circus and they've been caught out. And the government should not give them any support. Mr Morrison needs to cut off the umbilical cord of legitimacy which the Liberal-Nationals are giving One Nation. They are extremists. They've been caught out being extremists. Mr Morrison now needs to sever the ties. And if he doesn't do that, well then, what is the difference? Two more questions and then I better go. You go next sorry and then I'll come to you.

JOURNALIST: The government says that minimum wage increases have outstripped CPI increases so who’s right, you or them?

SHORTEN: If this government wants to debate about what a good job they've been doing on wages; bring it on. Let's go out to any high street anywhere in Australia and the government should say that they've been doing a good job on wages growth, and we’ll go out and run the no case and say that wages have been stagnating. Listen, the only people who think that they're doing a good job on wages growth are ministers and their staff. They're not in touch with what's happening in the real world. Sorry, I did promise you next and then you.

JOURNALIST: Do you want the cloud of a leadership challenge or a leadership vote hanging over Labor during the entire federal campaign?

SHORTEN: There is no cloud because frankly, all the processes that go into the New South Wales state election leadership have been put on hold till after the federal election.

JOURNALIST: There will still be people counting numbers and things like that though?

SHORTEN: I think we want to talk about cloud over leadership, I don't know about you but I was a bit startled by the revelations I read in today's newspapers about the leaking on Mr Morrison from his left, from his right, from underneath, from on top of him. The reality is that if you want to talk about divided leadership, let's have a look at the fact that Mr Morrison's colleagues are now leaking on the Prime Minister about his plans for a multi-billion dollar detention centres in Australia, through to his role in Mr Turnbull's demise. This Government in Canberra is divided. What happened by contrast in New South Wales is Mr Daley stood down and all attention in Labor was on the federal election and support for united, stable ederal team.

JOURNALIST: Just on social media companies, a push to have them face tougher penalties if they don't do the right thing. Do you think that is a good idea?

SHORTEN: Listen if there's a constructive solution to seeing greater accountability on social media platforms, I'm up for it. Let's be clear, in traditional media which many of you represent, if you publish some of the things which we see filter out of the swamp of social media, you'd go to jail. You are accountable. Yet some of these platforms publish first and worry about it later. And so therefore, I'm up for making sure that we have protections. Now, that doesn't exonerate everything which gets written in traditional media and giving sustenance to some of the hate-speakers on the extremities but I do think social media needs to accept that in Australia, you play by Aussie rules. I don't know if you're aware but in 2017, Google had a billion dollars of revenue in this country but only paid $37 million tax. Facebook in 2016 had $330 million of revenue and paid $12 million tax. We've got to start smartening up. Social media is fantastic, the internet is amazing, it's all very good. But what we need to do is make sure that everyone plays by the same rules and by our standards.

JOURNALIST: Would a Labor Government legislate criminal sanctions against the social media companies in the way that the Morrison Government is canvassing?

SHORTEN: The Morrison Government hasn't given us enough time to legislate anything. They've been running a witness protection racket for the government since the start of this year. The fact that they're going to race to an election two days after the budget’s brought down to avoid scrutiny. This government hasn't got time to do anything. They've run out of governing. So I love it when they say that they've got but his brand new idea. You and I both know they've got no intention of doing anything about it this side of the election. But if they do have a good idea, we'll look at it. First thing I'm going to do is sit down and talk to the big social media companies and explain to them the sense of outrage and powerlessness and some frustration that many Australians feel when I see some of the anonymous vile spewed out on social media, with seemingly no accountability and protection for everyday citizens.

FIONA MCLEOD, CANDIDATE FOR HIGGINS: Good morning everyone and welcome to Ashburton and the fabulous electorate of Higgins. Bill, we're really delighted you are here this morning with Catherine and Jennifer. Jennifer of course is the candidate for Chisholm, which is right across the road. We have a really important announcement today on the critical area of health which as you know is a priority area for a Labor Government.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Fiona. That was Fiona McLeod, Labor's new candidate for Higgins. I'm here with Jennifer Yang, Labor's candidate Chisholm and of course Catherine King our Shadow Minister for Health. I'm really pleased to announce that if a Labor Government is elected in six or seven weeks’ time, within our first 50 days we will reverse the freeze to Medicare items, we'll make sure that the out-of-pocket costs - which have been going up under the current government - that that stops now because we're going to start the indexation of 100 Medicare items on the 1st of July this year. For the last five and a half years Australian patients, Australian families, and Australian GPs, have had to bear the burden of the unfair freeze on Medicare patient rebates. For the last five and a half years under this government, when a patient's gone to see a doctor they've had their rebate frozen - that's the payment that goes back to the patient. In the last five and a half years though, inflation has gone up. Everything's gone up except people's wages. But unfortunately the patient rebate that's the same now as it was in 2014, which effectively means that this Liberal National Government in Canberra have been cost shifting the cost of health care in this country back on to the wallets and purses of families and patients, and of course the GP surgeries. Everything's been going up but that rebate has been frozen. So Labor is going to make sure that we deliver a real cost of living benefit to patients and that we also make sure that it is your Medicare card not your credit card which determines the quality of health you get here in this country. And this will cover items such as mental health programs, chronic illness check-ups, pregnancy consultations. This is good news, it's fair dinkum, it's real and only Labor can be trusted with Medicare and only Labor can be trusted to make sure it's your Medicare card not your credit card which determines the quality of health in this country. I'd now like to invite my colleague Catherine King to talk a little bit further about this important announcement today.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks Bill and look it's terrific to be here in the Ashburton Medical Centre alongside Fiona and Jennifer. This is a $213 million investment in general practice. We know that General Practices and the patients who rely on them - the thousands of patients every single day visiting general practices - have found that their costs are going up. The cost to see a GP in the years since the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government have been in power has gone up by 25 per cent. People are now paying more out of pocket to see a GP than ever before, and that, let alone the cost to see a specialist which has gone up by even more. People across the country are in desperate need to access general practice services. They come to these practices every single day and under the Morrison Government their costs have been going up. Well Labor wants to put a down payment on our investment in general practice - $213 million to once and for all end this six year Medicare freeze that has done untold damage to our health care system and support the patients who are here like those in Ashburton Medical Centre.

SHORTEN: Thanks Catherine, are there any questions on this?

JOURNALIST: Is this a carbon copy of the Mediscare campaign you ran in 2016 election?

SHORTEN: Well I don't agree with the assumption of the question. What this is about is making sure that it's your Medicare card not your credit card which determines your health care in this country. Australians in the 1980s went without a wage rise to pay for Medicare, and we pay our Medicare levy as well, and people pay their taxes to Canberra. But what's happened is even though Australians have already paid for our health care system, this government has put the cost of the health care system back onto the burden of Australian families and their savings. Now, what is truly scary, is that for five and a half years this Government's frozen the patient rebate. That's estimated to have cost Australian patients billions of dollars even though they've already paid for their Medicare system through their taxes. What's really scary is this Government's cut $2.8 billion from hospitals even though Australians pay taxes to make sure that our hospital funding isn't cut. What's really scary is this Government's cut nearly $2 billion from aged care services. What's really scary is that this Government has cut $360 million from preventative health programs. And you know what's really scary? Another three years of Liberal Nationals being in charge of our health care system - that will take it to nearly nine years. They've done damage, we've got to stop the damage, we've got to put the patients back at the centre of our health care system.

JOURNALIST: Are there are - sorry - are there any circumstances in which a Shorten Government would reintroduce a rebate freeze down the track?

SHORTEN: No, we have no plans to do that. In fact I think one of the big lessons that we've seen in the course of this decade is that health is a number one issue. There are other important issues to people, I get that. But so long as Australians have got their health, and their family have got their health, then we can deal with everything else that life turns up. That's why Labor has made some serious economic reform decisions, because we are determined to be able to pay for the best health care system in the world. You know, I'm ambitious for Australia, not to have the best tax deductions and loopholes in the world, but to have the best quality health care and it starts with preventative health, and of course then it must fundamentally put GPs and patients at the centre of what we do. We want to have the best hospital system in the world. We've got to have a better aged care system than we're currently doing. So we see health care as a fundamental issue of a Labor government.

JOURNALIST: How can you assure Australians of this though given that Labor introduced the rebate or the rebate freeze when it was last in power?

SHORTEN: What you're referring to is that the government made, the then government, made a decision to delay indexation from September of one year to line up for the next financial year of July. But I know what the Government's pushing - the government actually wants to get a magic wand out and make you forget the last five and a half years, as if it never happened. Well the current fellow who's the Prime Minister in three of his budgets he presided over cuts to Medicare. The current Health Minister, when he can put his head up from his frontline marginal seat in Flinders, is running around and blaming Labor for everything that he's been in charge - I mean you got to love these Liberal Ministers in Canberra - they take the wages, they take the limousines, they take all the top class benefits of being a Minister and then they want to blame Labor who's not in power. I didn't make Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull and now the current Prime Minister cut health care - but I can fix it.

JOURNALIST: So will you guarantee that you won't introduce a rebate freeze?

SHORTEN: We have absolutely no plans to introduce a freeze on the patient rebate. We want to fix the problem that they've been making.

JOURNALIST: I've got another question. So the government signalled it will spend half a billion dollars on health before the election - will Labor match that?

SHORTEN:  We're going to spend more than the Government on health care. If the government wants to have a competition about who do you trust on health care and Medicare, I'm up for that contest. I mean, the government is sort of dropping heavy handed hints that the election will be on May the 11th. The real issue is the budget. What this government wants to do - and their tactics are pretty obvious aren't they - they've basically shut down Parliament for the first half of this year to avoid scrutiny on their record of cuts in health care. Then they're gonna have a budget where hey presto, they want to try and pretend that they haven't been the government for the last five and a half years – but you can trust them over their promises in the next five weeks. This Budget is not designed in the national interest. This Budget is not designed to last either. It's designed to stick together with sticky tape and ice cream sticks and paddle pop sticks to get through to the election in six weeks’ time. Don't judge the government by the promise they're going to make in the budget. Judge them on the cuts that they've made over the last five and a half years. You know for Labor, we sincerely believe, we believe you know what, we think this card should be what determines your health care in this country not your credit card, it's Labor DNA.

JOURNALIST: How do you fancy your chances here in Higgins?

SHORTEN: Well we've got the best candidate, we've got the best policies we're the most stable and united party and I think that when you look at the long term people are over the negativity of the last five and a half years, people want positive policies. Fiona McLeod, Senior Counsel is someone who's spent 30 years with a really top shelf legal career and also serving people who've been done over by the system. She's got a good record in the private sector. For Labor to be able to attract a candidate of Fiona's calibre to run in Higgins shows that one, people like Fiona with her track record of contribution in public life see a value in the Labor Party in politics. But it also reflects we are the stable and united policy party of Australian politics, aren't we? Really I mean we're on our third Liberal Prime Minister, we've had countless Health Ministers, we've had 12 energy policies, we had 22 reshuffles. Lifelong Liberals are contemplating voting Labor for the first time because they just want one Prime Minister for three years and they want a vision for the future not for just politics as usual.

JOURNALIST: So how confident are you that you can win the seat?

SHORTEN: Sorry, I might come back to you?

JOURNALIST: Sorry  - how confident are you that you can win this seat? Thanks.

SHORTEN: Listen it's an uphill battle, Labor's never held Higgins. I mean Higgins is where - Higgins has always been, the Liberals have taken it for granted as a safe seat. But I just say to the voters of Higgins have a good look at the not only the curriculum vitae not only the accomplishments of Fiona McLeod, but have a look at why she's running and the values which motivate her and perhaps we might get her to explain. It's an uphill battle but I've got the best candidate, we've got the best policies, we're certainly united and we will put One Nation and extremist parties last which is what a lot of people in Higgins want to do. And we will take a fair dinkum climate change policy to the next election. I mean if the Liberals really were fair dinkum about climate change Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister wouldn't he. Would you like to hear from Fiona about the challenge?

JOURNALIST: Just quickly why did you drop Josh Spiegel?

SHORTEN: Oh, he's a lovely fellow, he's a lovely fellow and we're going to hear a lot more from Josh but you'll get an almost unique opportunity with Fiona McLeod and she can speak for herself. You know, head of the Law Council of Australia, head of the Australian Bar Association, but it's not even the achievements on paper.  Why don't we hear from her in a moment, Josh has got a great future and do you notice in the Labor Party we do things well. And yes, we replaced a man with a woman. I don't know if the Liberals have ever done that but I'll come back and answer your other questions but there’s been a couple on Higgins. Fi? McLEOD: Yes, good morning everybody and it's a real pleasure to be here. Thank you Bill for that introduction. People have been asking me why I stepped forward to Higgins and the answer for me was really simple. After all of my work being a champion for social justice, for people through the legal system, I saw that it was time to step forward and try and make that contribution for a broader range of people from within Government. And that's my goal to make a contribution to a team that not only can address the economic issues that we're facing and the challenges that we're facing there, but also bring heart. Bring heart to the role so that we're actually not leaving people behind. What I ask myself before I made this decision is what planet are we leaving for our kids? What are we doing or not doing with the current government about climate change. How are we ignoring the environment when the economic situation and our future is so tied up with the environment and we've got to look at these things and tackle them seriously as the Reserve Bank Governor has said recently. So the environment and the climate change inaction from this government is a primary motivation for me as is creating opportunity for our kids. Now we know about the crush on the cost of living for most people and people in this electorate are feeling that crush. What does it cost to come to the GP? What are the pressures on GPs to keep the doors open and provide the excellent services that they are providing? Where are the cost pressures, cost of living pressures across mental health, across aged care, across women' s reproductive health? All of these issues are critical and not just in health but the cost of going to the shops, to the Woollies across the road. The cost of paying bills week in week out and it's only Labor that can address these cost of living issues because the government seems to have forgotten the little people. So cost of living issues are really important to me. And the third thing that I wanted to mention this morning is that old chestnut of trust in government. Now, this is something I know a lot about having worked on issues of trust and championing a National Integrity Commission for a long time. It seems now that we have a government that thinks it's okay to just say, don't ask those questions talk to the hand that was last week. We are no longer in that position. We need to restore, critically restore trust in government and our public institutions and I've got a lot of ideas about how we can do that within Labor and bring those ideas to the table. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks Fiona.

JOURNALIST: Bill can I ask you, how important will Victoria be then to the next federal election?

SHORTEN: Everywhere in Australia is important to me for the next election, we're chasing every vote everywhere. But Victoria is certainly a place where I think Labor's message is resonating well. We've got Jennifer Yang running in Chisholm, that was a seat held by Julia Banks for the Liberal Party but then the Liberal Party and her have parted ways, she's now running against the Health Minister which is not exactly a glowing endorsement on the Health Minister's health policies is it, or his role in getting rid of Malcolm Turnbull. We're competitive right across Victoria because I think Victorians want to see better public transport in our cities. They want to see women get more equal treatment than they've been receiving. They want to see real action on climate change. They're looking for stability. Plenty of Victorians also say that everything's going up except our wages. They're sick of the fact that because of no climate policy energy bills are going up. They're deeply frustrated that with the Medicare freeze on patient rebates the out-of-pocket cost to see a specialist have gone up 38 per cent, to see a GP somewhere near 25 per cent. Victorians are doing it hard just to be fair, are all Australians. You know our story, Labor's story is one for middle and working class Australians. We can pay for our promises because we're making serious economic reforms. We're offering a better, bigger, fairer tax cut to nearly 10 million working Australians. We want to restore people's penalty rates. When you look at it we are the only party seeking to form a government who've got a package of measures to help with cost of living. So I think we're going okay in Victoria but that remains to be seen and I think we're going okay across Australia but the sheer audacity of running such a talented candidate as Fiona McLeod in Liberal heartland shows that we are chasing every vote, everywhere. If you've been voting Liberal or National your whole life and you don't like their disunity. If you've been voting Liberal or National your whole life and you're concerned about the infighting in the National Party. If you're concerned about the fact that they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and no one's ever explained to you why, this time round send them a message. Your vote is not going to be taken for granted. Labor's got lots of policies we don't expect everyone in Australia to like every one of them but we want your votes because for the last five and a half years, we've worked hard to earn it. We've got the policies, we've got the talented frontbench, the talented backbench and we are united. You know that old saying in politics from John Howard and Bob Hawke: If you can't manage your own party, you can't manage the Government and you can't manage the nation.

JOURNALIST: Just turning to New South Wales, do you think Michael Daley should step down now and how worried are you about a leadership challenge in New South Wales ahead of the federal election?

SHORTEN: Well that's a state election issue. I'm not running for Premier of New South Wales. But as I said yesterday, I congratulate Gladys Berejiklian. She's a more moderate Liberal and I suspect that those hard liners behind Peter Dutton and Tony Abbott and Morrison who got rid of Malcolm Turnbull must be realising that people don't like extremes in political parties. In terms of who the New South Wales Labor Party pick, that'll be a matter for them. But I did say yesterday - and I do repeat - his comments which were video taped were wrong. I've told them they were wrong. It's not even that you shouldn't say them, you shouldn't think them.

JOURNALIST: Okay we're weeks away from the federal election, why don't you say when negative gearing changes will be introduced?

SHORTEN: We will answer that within days and weeks. But fair's fair, we announced our negative gearing policy three and a half years ago. Like the Liberal Party, they're going to spring all sorts of little measures in this budget which they've only been thinking of because of focus group research in the previous month before the budget. We're treating the Australian public with respect. See, I don't want to win the election just because we're not the Liberals - although, that's a pretty good reason to vote for us. I want to win the election because we've got positive policies which speak to the lives that people live. You know, sometimes we over-complicate politics, don't we? Really it's about your family, it's about your health. You want to make sure you're in good health and if you're not, you can see someone. You want to make sure your family is okay, doing alright, and of course they need to see a doctor, we want them to be able afford to do so. And beyond that, then we're putting policies which are about cost of living. Going to the letter box now and getting one of those envelopes from the power company is like an episode of lion-tamer without a chair and a whip. You don't know what's going to pop out of the envelope and your generally sure it's an increase in your bill. So the Government has just failed on that front for the last five and a half years. Climate change, just how hopeless is Australian politics that we haven't got good policies on climate change. Everyone knows it's real, everyone knows that it's getting worse and everyone knows this Government is broken. Expecting this Government to do something on climate change in the next three years when they've got rid of Malcolm Turnbull, the only Liberal who actually wanted to do something about it. This Government is broken on climate change. So if you look at it, we've got lots of good things we're offering people and in terms of our negative gearing policy, we'll certainly clarify that in the very near future. We wouldn't mind the Prime Minister clarifying when the election is. The biggest tip is he's brought the budget forward. Everyone knows that the election date is going to be five or six weeks after the budget and the budget's all about just trying to get people to miraculously forget the last five years of chaos and confusion and division and hope they can magic up some money and then everything will miraculously as if it's never happened for the last five and a half years.

JOURNALIST: Is that result in New South Wales a wakeup call though for Labor and are you worried about seats like Lindsay?
SHORTEN: It's always flattering to have your lines quoted back to the next day. I do think that all parties can learn from elections. I think fair minded commentators have agreed that it was fought on state issues with less federal implications. But I for one think you can always learn from every other experience. And for me what I've taken out of it, is the rise of these third parties. These third parties can't form governments. The people are protesting. And what that tells me is that if you just go negative and you've got nothing positive to say, people are going to switch off you. That's why we're outlining positive policies like today where we're saying to patients, under a Labor Government, your patient rebates are going to go up again after being frozen for the entire period of the Coalition Government. Perhaps one or two last questions.

JOURNALIST: When will you confirm your final position on using Kyoto credits towards a Paris climate target?

SHORTEN: Very soon. We've already put out a lot of our climate and energy policies. We're committed to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. We're committed to reducing carbon emissions greenhouse gases by 45 per cent by 2030. By 2050, we want our nation to be a zero net carbon pollution emitter. We've also said that we want to help households with the family bills by encouraging a roll out of more batteries, so people can, the two million households who have already got solar rooftop can store that energy and we can encourage more people to go down that path. So in the very near future. I did also say in Tasmania on Saturday, where we were talking about our exciting new irrigation projects for agriculture in Tasmania, to make Tasmania one of the food bowls of Australian agricultural exports, I did say then that we're seriously considering what some of the more progressive nations have done; the United Kingdom, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, New Zealand and not using the Kyoto credits. But we haven't got to a final position and we're taking expert advice.

JOURNALIST: Could I just ask you a question? Why didn't you get the swings then to you that you got in the Victorian election and what do you make of that result in New South Wales?

SHORTEN: I'm not to be a commentator on state elections. As I said, I'm not running for State Premier but I've got no doubt that perhaps people thought that Premier Berejiklian was a moderate Liberal. They hadn't had the leadership instability that their Federal partners have had. But I also think that in the case of Dan Andrews, he had a very strong story to tell too. But one thing I think we all know is that when a government is divided, when a government's avoiding the scrutiny of Parliament, when a government's presided over five and a half years of everything going up but your wages, when they've frozen Medicare - well people are going to say 'why would we give this Government another three years when they've had nearly six years and done nothing good with it except perhaps hurt people's hip pocket?

JOURNALIST: If I could just ask once about taxes please? There's talk of tax cuts in the federal budget. How big do tax cuts need to be for it to be worthwhile to most Australians?

SHORTEN: That's a hard question because every Australian's circumstances are different. But probably the nearest - we'll have to wait and see what's in the budget although - they have moved the budget forward by a month and they've made sure that there's going to be little scrutiny of the budget after they bring it down. So their tactic is clear: 'Let's just try and get through the six weeks and hope people forget the cuts to schools and hospitals in the last five years'. Going to your idea of winners and what is enough for people; the nearest illustration I can use of our thinking on this is that last year the Government proposed a tax cut of about $500 dollars for people. Of course at the top end, they wanted to give a lot more away to very well-off people. Labor came up with a policy of giving every Australian who earns between $41,000 and $90,000 a year $928 back. So look at some of the great staff who are working here, some of them might be on the front desk, some of them might be health professionals, even the people who come here after hours and clean up. Maybe there's a married couple, one person earns $90,000, one earns $60,000. Under Labor in our first three years, they're going to get nearly $6,000 back. Under the Liberals, they'll get $3,000. So all I know is that we're offering bigger, better, fairer tax cuts. If the Government does more, we'll have a look at them, if the nation can afford it - well, we've got more room in our budget because we're reforming the loopholes, we're cracking down on the multinationals, we're saying that to the top end, we can't have unsustainable tax subsidies for some people when the vast bulk of working people in this country are going backwards. And they're going backwards, wages have stagnated, people are spending more of their household savings just to make ends meet, the energy bills are up, the out-of-pockets to see a doctor. This country and the economy is not working in the interests of everyday Australians; the small businesses, the pensioners and the vast bulk of working people. Labor wants to change that. I think this country does best when everyone's getting a fair go not just the lucky few at the top end. Thanks everybody.

ANTHONY BYRNE, MEMBER FOR HOLT: I'm Anthony Byrne, the federal Member for Holt. You're actually in, for journalists who have travelled out here, the constituency of Holt, one of the fastest-growing areas in Australia. And that's what makes the announcements that you've read about and are about to hear about today, more significant. Given the significance of the announcements, I'm obviously accompanied by my federal colleagues, Mark Dreyfus and Julian Hill, and also by the candidates for Flinders, Josh, Peta Murphy from Dunkley, and Simon Curtis from La Trobe. The state Member for Cranbourne, Pauline Richards, and the member for Carrum, Sonya Kilkenny. But also importantly, the Premier, and most importantly, the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten. The road that you see there has at the moment, 25,000 vehicles that go through it per day. In about another 10 years’ time, it will be 50,000 people. You're in the city of Casey. The City of Casey has a population at present of over 300,000 people - 349,000 people. It's almost as big as Canberra. By 2041, it's going to be 540,000 people. This area, ladies and gentlemen, is just transforming before your eyes. And what it needs - and it has with a State Labor Government that's invested significantly through Premier Andrews in this area, a State Government that is invested and invested in the future. What we do need is we need a Federal Government that's going to do the same thing, and that's why I'm so proud to have my friend and colleague and the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten here, and I'll pass over to Bill.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, everybody. It's great to be here with Premier Andrews, shadow spokesperson Anthony Albanese and a range of our Labor candidates and members at both the State and Federal level. This is an exciting announcement for Victoria, for Melbourne, in particular for the south-eastern suburbs. Melbourne is one of the fastest growing centres in Australia. I remember coming here as a university student, visiting friends, and this was basically power lines and paddocks and a few plant nurseries between Frankston and Dandenong. And beyond Dandenong, there was some great country towns like Pakenham and Berwick. But in the last 30 years, and in particular the last 10 years, this area has boomed. There are thousands of people flooding in and the roads need to keep up with the population growth. It's growing so fast here that even the GPS is not keeping up with the new roads and redirections. So what this area needs is a State and a Federal government focused on the people. Now they've got that at the state level with Premier Dan Andrews, on everything from level crossings, to his ambitious vision for suburban rail, to further investment in roads. But unfortunately for the last six years, the fastest-growing areas of Australia have been neglected by a Coalition Liberal Government who really don't know where Melbourne is. Did you know in the last financial year, for every dollar spent by Canberra on roads and infrastructure around Australia, only seven cents has come to Victoria. That's not good enough when people in Victoria pay their taxes to Canberra. So today, I'm really pleased to be announcing along with Premier Dan Andrews, that we are good to go to build a great pipeline of projects of roads in south-eastern Melbourne if we win the next election in six or seven or eight weeks. This is not a pipe dream, it's reality. The Victorian Government's done the hard work, they've got the plans. What they need is an ally in Canberra to invest in the fastest growing suburbs around Victoria, and indeed around Australia. So there's a range of exciting projects which will see the roads uncluttered, de-congested. People move out here because they can afford the houses, but the road infrastructure really needs to keep up. That's what we're doing today. We've got a plan. It's ready to go at the state level, the work's been done. And if we can get elected in eight weeks’ time, then this plan becomes a reality. We've got the ability to raise the funds to spend the money and it'll be in our first budget. I'd now like to hand over to Premier Dan Andrews and then Anthony Albanese. I should just say though with regards to the New South Wales election, I extend my congratulations to Gladys Berejiklian on being re-elected Premier of New South Wales. I commiserate with Michael Daly and State Labor. They put up a big effort but they fell short. But my congratulations go to Premier Berejiklian. Now over to Dan Andrews.

DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: Thanks very much, Bill and it's great to be out here in the south-eastern suburbs, able to celebrate a proper partnership to get things done. Over these last four and a half years, we've been building in road and rail, hospitals and schools - how much more could we have achieved and how much more will we be able to achieve with a proper partner in Canberra? Someone who's prepared to invest side by side with us, to do that hard work, to make sure that we've got people home safer and sooner, more time with families, less time on terribly congested roads. These outer south-eastern roads are ready to go. And I can announce today that the request for proposal - an important part of a tender process - will in fact begin today, with documentation going up online, and we'll be out talking to the market in the coming weeks and months, getting final prices and putting together the final package so that we can be under construction in 2020 and complete this entire package, a very big package of suburban roads entirely upgraded, completed by 2025. The other point to make today as well is that Bill's commitment of $850 million comes also with a shared commitment between the Federal Labor Party and the State Labor Government to make sure that every time we spend taxpayers’ money building the infrastructure we need, we're investing in jobs and skills. One in 10 workers on these projects will be apprentices, trainees, cadets. And that's all about leaving a legacy so that right across their working life, they can continue to build the infrastructure that matters so very much. So Bill, I'm so pleased to think that finally, obviously we have to work hard towards the election of a Labor Government in seven or eight weeks’ time but if that comes to pass, finally, the people of Victoria will have a strong and equal partner in getting the infrastructure we need built today to set us up for the future. Can I also, just before I throw the Albo, can I also pass on my congratulations to Gladys. It's a great outcome for her and I wish her well. As a Victorian Premier, I don't wish her too well but still, it is a fantastic result for her and she's rightly proud. Albo.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thanks, mate. This is what a true partnership between what we hope is a Shorten Labor Government and a State Government looks like. People sitting down, working through plans, working cooperatively. And when people look back at the years of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison revolving door government, what they'll look at is six years of lost opportunity. Six years in which we didn't have investment here in Victoria. We lifted investment last time I was the Infrastructure Minister from $87 dollars for every Victorian to over $200. And what we want to do is to lift Victoria up so it gets its share again. In our last budget, Victoria received 26 per cent of the national infrastructure budget. Last year, it received 7.7 per cent. This is in spite of the fact that Melbourne is Australia's fastest growing capital city and Victoria is Australia's fastest growing state. What we need to do is invest in the growth regions. This very electorate of Holt is where the Growth Areas Alliance had its national conference I spoke at about 18 months ago, for that very reason. Just a few weeks ago, I, with the federal candidates and members who are here today, met with all of the councils in this region about their priorities. What we do today is deliver on these eight projects. $850 million dollars, including a new project for a park and ride facility. Including making sure that when they have made announcements, the current Government, such as Racecourse Road, they haven't done it properly. We'll have a full duplication in partnership with the level crossing removal that the Victorian Government are undertaking themselves. The Victorian Government under Daniel Andrews has had to do all of the heavy lifting. Whether it be rail, whether it be road, whether it be park and ride facilities. A Shorten Labor Government will partner in the interests of Victorians, and in the interests of improving roads safety, and in the interests of boosting productivity and our national economy. At the same time as boosting jobs and making sure that we boost training and skills opportunities for people in this region.

SHORTEN: Thanks very much, Anthony. Are there any questions on this announcement or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you've given some interviews in recent days where you've spoken about what sort Prime Minister you'd hope to be. Is that clear indication that you believe that you will win the election?

SHORTEN: No. It's a clear indication I want people to vote for Labor at the next election. I think in Australia at the moment, the most common sentiment is that people are sick of the instability and chaos of politics, they're sick of division. And I think they look at Labor federally and say, well, we mightn't agree with every policy you've got but we know you're united and we know you're stable. I think there's another equally important feeling out there in Australian families every evening, the sense that everything's going up except your wages. Only Labor's got a wages policy. Only Labor's going to be fair dinkum on climate change. Only Labor's helping make sure that women get an equal deal to men. Only Labor can say that we're the stable party of politics. And in regard to today's announcement, we didn't get trapped behind a traffic jam of Liberal limousines coming out here to find the south-eastern suburbs of Melbourne. As Anthony said and as Daniel said, this is the fastest-growing part of Australia at the moment. But it hasn't been getting its fair share from Canberra. It's important that when we encourage people to move out to the outer suburbs, when we want them to have their dream of their own home, that we back it up with the taxes people spend to reinvest in their communities, on their roads out here, so they're not spending hours and hours every day, practically weeks every year, sitting in traffic trying to get home and get to work.

JOURNALIST: There is a $3 billion contingent liability in the budget at the moment for East-West Link. Would you -

SHORTEN:  Well why don't I'll let Anthony answer this, he is clearly gunning to.

JOURNALIST: Are you going to use that money to fund any of this work or will that be spent on something else?

ALBANESE: Well this is just a farce. Find something in the budget papers, find something, a line item with $3 billion. What they did was they took $3 billion that had been allocated for the Melbourne Metro that was approved by Infrastructure Australia. They took that money and allocated it, for a project that is going ahead, and allocated it to a project that isn't going ahead. And then because it was a budget fix, they advanced $1.5 billion to the Victorian Government, that they then wouldn't allow them to spend for ages. They then approved the spending of that and then are trying to double count and say the $3 billion is still there. This is a joke. This was for a project that had a BCR, a benefit of 45 cents for every dollar. And as I've said to various Liberals in the Cabinet who have raised this issue in Canberra, if they give me $100, I'll give them $45 the next time I see them and we'll call it a deal. Because that's the proposal that they had that's been rejected, now twice, with the election and re-election of the Andrews Government. This is a con for them to justify the fact that Victoria is being short changed and getting 7.7 per cent of the Federal infrastructure budget. It should be called out for what it is. If they've got money available, seriously in the budget, they should be allocating it in areas that are ready to go, like these projects.

JOURNALIST: Just to be clear, if you're the Federal Infrastructure Minister post the Federal election, what would you do with that money? Would you -

ALBANESE: It's not there. This is a fantasy, this is an absolute fantasy. What we are about is real projects with real dollars that create real jobs, that make a real difference to urban congestion. Not fantasies, not pretending something's there that that simply isn't. And the fact is that because of that decision, the Andrews Government has gone it alone on Melbourne Metro and has gone it alone on so many projects. This is just a con. And the fact is that my state of New South Wales has got pretty close to 50 per cent of the infrastructure budget. When I was the Minister, I cooperated with the Victorian Liberal Government, I cooperated with the Newman Government. What we have in Canberra now is a partisan government that has punished people for voting Labor.
SHORTEN: I'm might just say in the light, just momentarily as you collect your next questions and reflect on what Anthony said, and that goes to answering again, your earlier question, this is why Labor's competitive: we've got more unity, we've got more talent and we've got more vision, and that clearly is the case in infrastructure.

JOURNALIST: How does a result in New South Wales effect your campaign over the next 6 weeks?

SHORTEN: I think it'd be fair to say that there weren't many federal implications, but rarely is there an election that you can't learn something from. You know, I've been thinking about it overnight, and the rise of some of those smaller parties and independents show that no major party can take the voter for granted. And I actually think that the challenge, or the lesson, for me out of yesterday, is to keep putting forward a long term view of the nation, to keep putting forward vision. It's not enough to rely on the fact that you're not the other party, that you've got to offer a positive set of plans. And when you look at the fact that we've got a bigger, better tax cuts for working people, that we're going to reverse the cuts to education, hospitals and health care, and of course, take real action on climate change, and get wages moving - that's the sort of vision people are looking for.

JOURNALIST: But after being buoyed from the Victorian results, is this pretty average result for Labor in New South Wales a wakeup call?

SHORTEN: Well again, I'd probably refer you to my previous answer. I think when you have a look at the debates they were having a New South Wales, it was about stadiums, it was about the treatment of the bush in New South Wales. But you know, no one should ever say there's nothing to learn. And again, I would say that when you have a look at the vote that independents and third-parties got, not Labor, Liberal, Nats, then what we need to do is recognise people are hungry for vision. Politics as usual doesn't cut it. There's a lot of people who think that the system's broken or that the fix is in and that the vested interests run Australia. Well we're coming with a different platform. We're coming with a platform which is about looking after working and middle class people. What frustrates Australians is we can't move forward on climate change and energy policy. What frustrates people is that everything's going up except their wages. What frustrates people is education cuts and health care cuts. That's what's frustrating people. We've got a vision for that and we look forward to the next seven weeks.
JOURNALIST: Bill, Michael Daley's comments about Asians very damaging there in the last week. Does that leave your party with a lasting problem in that state?
SHORTEN: No. I've spoken to Michael Daley. He's the first to acknowledge that his comments were wrong and I've certainly said that to him. I think he paid a price for that. More generally, when it comes to tolerance and diversity, I think again, it just highlights the importance of the mainstream parties putting the extremists last. Again, I say to Mr Morrison, put the country first, put One Nation and like-minded parties last.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret not being on the ground more in New South Wales? Do you personally regret not being on the ground in -

SHORTEN: I was very flattered that they asked me to speak at their launch. At least there was one major party leader speaking. Again though, I think you'd fairly say that there were a lot of state issues and that is the consensus. But you know, I think every election is a wakeup call and you've got to make sure you're offering strong vision, strong policies. I think even our harshest critics wouldn't say that we've been a small target opposition though, would they?

JOURNALIST: But why didn't you campaign more with Michael Daley?

SHORTEN: Sorry, I don't accept your assumption. I was up there six times. But also, I'm not running for Premier of New South Wales, and if I was, you would have seen a lot more of me.
JOURNALIST: What do you think Mark Latham will bring to the New South Wales Parliament? Do you think he will be a valuable addition there?

SHORTEN: Well, he brings his Federal parliamentary pension, but, I don't know. I find that talking about Mark Latham takes us nowhere.

JOURNALIST: Would you like to see Michael Daley continue as the Labor Leader in New South Wales?

SHORTEN: That will be a matter for New South Wales. Listen, Michael came in, 80-plus days, steep climb, did his best but I think even as your question's acknowledging, he hit some rough road in the last 10 days.

JOURNALIST: Before we get back on to this project to the Premier, do you support the crackdown on the tech-giants, Bill? Or do you -

SHORTEN: Yeah, we've been certainly talking about that in the light of Christchurch, it's a shocking wake up call to say that our major social media platforms, the new media, can't regard themselves as beyond the arm of regulation. I mean if you in the old media, probably some of the things that they allow on their platforms, you'd be in court. You've got to think about what happens before you publish. Social media is a fantastic development, the internet is fantastic - absolutely. But we can't allow it to become a swamp of hatred because - and it's no good for the people who run the swamp, create the swamp to then not take responsibility for what crawls out. What I'll do is I'll be meeting, like the current Prime Minister, with major companies, talking to them. But also what we want to do is, I think there's another issue which people have been raising with me in recent days, is how much tax do these companies pay? You know, if you run the local newsagency, you're a construction worker on this job, you've got to pay your tax. I was surprised, frankly, to find out that in 2017, Google had revenue of $1 billon in Australia, paid $37 million tax. So, I think there's a lot of conversations we've got to have with the big social media companies and I certainly look forward to embracing them with a constructive mindset.

JOURNALIST: The Treasurer knocked down a plan this week to increase taxes on the tech giants. I think it was a new digital tax that they were looking at. Is that something you'd be open to?

SHORTEN: We haven't seen what the Government's plans are. We're always open to being constructive.

JOURNALIST: Are fines or convictions the answer in your mind, or do we need to have a discussion first?

SHORTEN: Well I think it's all of the above, isn't it? And let's be clear, it's not just social media. I think existing media need to make sure that they're not encouraging hate speech. I think it's important that politicians, especially the mainstream politicians, work together to stop extremism. This country can't be the great country it should be if we're picking on minorities, if we're dividing, if we're teaching people to be afraid. You know, we've got to stop the dog whistling on immigration, stop the dog whistling and stop the hate speech or the covert encouragement of it. This is not just a one size fits all solution. Yes, the Googles, the Facebooks, the social media new platforms need to be more accountable. But it's all of us, really. All of us have to lift our performance. And that's why again, I'd encourage the Prime Minister to our follow our lead. He mightn't like Labor, and I don't like their policies, but I don't think that the Liberals are worse than One Nation or Fraser Anning. I'm not afraid to say that if Labor can't win the election, I'd rather have the Liberals than Pauline Hanson or One Nation. And our preferences are reflecting what I say. But Mr Morrison can't say that his preferences can do one thing and then pretend to be, you know, something else. His actions are what indicate the truth of his words.

JOURNALIST: Premier, real quick just back on this big spend. I know there's no final cost but how will we be paying our share?

ANDREWS: There'll be a budget allocation. There already has been and with additional support from a Shorten Labor Government that will mean that some of that funding is freed up to allocate to other projects. Ultimately, a proper partnership, a shared effort, 50:50 on these important projects means we can get them done quicker, we can deliver them in full, create jobs along the way, and that's the way that it should be. Bill's running on the notion of a fair go, and when it comes to infrastructure funding, Victorians have not been getting a fair go. That's why today's promise is so very important and welcomed wholeheartedly. Not just by me and my team, but I think from families right across the south-eastern suburbs who want to get home sooner and safer, they want to spend time with their kids, not time stuck on terribly congested roads. The Prime Minister doesn't seem to understand that. Bill Shorten as the alternative Prime Minister, he most certainly does.
JOURNALIST: I'm just making sure that it would come out of the budget, not be fronted up by a private company and then we've got to pay for it 10 years -

ANDREWS: No, no. These are all important road upgrades and cash grants from a future Commonwealth Government will help support building them. Very good. Thanks very much.
JUSTINE KEAY, MEMBER FOR BRADDON: Thanks everyone for coming out today to Forth. I was here the other day, it was actually blue skies and so sunny and thank you, Mike, for having me on that day and us today. Mike and his family has been farming this region for generations and Mike has played a very instrumental role in Tasmanian agriculture and development of really high value crops and export markets. And of course, the infrastructure that supports our farmers to do all those things, which is irrigation. And I'm joined today by my federal colleagues; the Member for Bass, Ross Hart, the Member for Lyons, Brian Mitchell, Senator Urquhart ,and our state Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Shane Broad here on the beautiful farms of Forth. Thank you again, Mike. Tasmanian Labor and Federal Labor have been the ones that have instigated, planned and-or funded the tranche one and two of Tasmanian irrigation schemes. We understand how important these schemes are to transforming Tasmanian landscape. You can go anywhere down, say, the Midlands where you've seen some of these transformations, where once you would have seen sheeps grazing, now you see high value poppies growing in those areas. We know the value of what this is for our state and we're going to make a very important announcement for all of Tasmania today, to continue that transformation. Labor will stand with farmers, Tasmanian farmers to develop and increase the value of Tasmania's agriculture, and to grow jobs in regional Tasmania, like here in places like Forth. So thank you very much for having us again, Mike, and I'd like to introduce Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition, to make this really important announcement for not only Tasmanian agricultural farmers but for our economy as a whole.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Justine. It's great to be here in Forth today at Mike's farm. I'd like to acknowledge that what I'm about to say is due to a lot of the lobbying of Justine and of course, Ross and Brian, Labor's team in the north and north west of Tasmania. Labor understands that Tasmania's agricultural future is very bright. But what we really need to do is make sure that there is a reliable supply of irrigation so that Tasmania's agricultural future can be as bright as I think it can be. It was back in 2016, the time of the dreadful floods, right across from Launceston right through the Latrobe, and what I saw there was a tremendous amount of water which would be wasted. I went back and checked. I mean, politicians come, they see these floods and then they go again. But I came back and checked. Tasmania has one per cent of Australia's landmass but has 13 per cent of the rainfall. And so what that means is that we're not capturing all the water which comes during the rain and not using it for irrigation. So today I've come back, just as we've seen with tranche one and tranche two, I'm going to announce that if we get elected in six or seven weeks’ time, we will fund $100 million on top of the Tasmanian Government's $70 million commitment to provide the next round of irrigated land so that we can really turbocharge Tasmania's food and agricultural future. What this $100 million means in a practical sense is it'll mean 78,000 mega litres of additional water. That's going to make a big difference. In a practical engineering sense, 479 kilometres of pipes. It'll be 23 pumping -  sorry, it'll be seven dams, it'll be 23 pumping stations, it'll be four power stations. What this effectively is, is 3,900 jobs. Tasmanian ag at the moment is about $1.5 billion, but within the next 20 years, if we play our cards right, we put in the airport links to go to Asia, we get the irrigation going, it's going to be a $10 billion-plus industry. The time is right for Tasmanian agriculture to take the world by storm. It just needs a government in Canberra who understands the opportunities that are here. So a $100 million, let's get on. 10 different projects, the final feasibility study will have to be done to confirm the precise nature of the projects. but this is a marvellous opportunity. Labor was formed in the bush. It was formed on the land as much as we're formed in the factories in the cities. So this is Labor committing itself to be the party of farmers and agriculturalists. Everyone knows farmers get squeezed by the big corporations. Everyone knows that what the farmers need of Tasmania, just like they need on the mainland, is a government who has got their back and doesn't take them for granted. Our announcement for $100 million of irrigation is exactly what the doctor ordered for Tasmanian agriculture. I'd now like to hand over to Mike, who has got a very distinguished record, not just as a grower, but as a farm leader. Five years helping run AUSVEG, on the board of the Tasmanian Graziers and Farmers Association. Let's hand over to him to see what he thinks about what we need to do.
MIKE BADCOCK: Yes, I would like to thank the Labor Party for your commitment to the third tranche in irrigation in Tasmania. I think this is fantastic and I think this is a great initiative for governments helping farmers who can help themselves. I think it's a great initiative. The irrigation systems in Tasmania is really put in Tasmania on the map. It's opening up the area to a lot of different crops crops we haven't thought of yet. And you watch where we go in Tasmania. The next thing in Tasmania we need is to develop more exports out of our state. Because we are known for producing a very high quality, premium product, and the world is requiring this. So as soon as we can get direct flights out of Tasmania, overseas, you watch Tasmania bloom. It is starting to bloom now. It's just a start. I see a fantastic future coming through. Water is wealth and we have got some very good infrastructure here, we've got some very good soils and we've got a lot of expertise. So by having guaranteed water on our farms, it's just massive. It allows people to invest, looking for the future, better ways of doing things, so thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions about this exciting announcement or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: What would you say are the main deficiencies in the current system when it comes to irrigation?

SHORTEN: Well, we see it happening right behind us. You go for months where there's no rain and all of a sudden you get the rain but it's not in the right place sometimes, it's not where we need it. So the irrigation system will allow a whole lot of land to be developed which currently isn't. When you were with us on the tour, you might have noticed as we're looking towards Devonport, you could see a lot of the drier land between here and Devonport. Irrigation just opens it all up. What's remarkable about the productivity of this land is in the broccoli paddocks we were in, something like 200 tonnes of broccoli is going to come out of that crop. When we were in the carrot fields, 800 tonnes of carrots. Tasmania, nothing can hold it back except a lack of imagination on behalf of Canberra. We're here to change that.

JOURNALIST: Is there an expectation that Tasmania will take on a greater portion of the nation's agriculture in the coming years due to extreme weather events on the mainland that don't effect Tasmania as much?

SHORTEN: I think the times suit Tasmania. I mean look at this amazing land, not too many frosts now are there?  So Tasmania's well-placed. When you look at it, what you need is you need good land, you've got that. If we can solve the water problem then that's the next tick of the box. Then what we need is good linkages into Asia. Labor's got a policy called FutureAsia, we intend to deepen our trade links with Asia. We intend to refurbish and revitalise airport infrastructure. But the missing link here is a commitment to the third tranche of irrigation projects. We've already seen what the first two tranches have delivered, and imagine what we can do with a third. The other thing this is about for me is, as I said, I was here, visited Latrobe in the devastation done by the floods then. But what a shocking waste. Not only do the floods do the damage then, but then we lose all the water. And so what we're trying to do is harness it. You know, Tasmania can grow crops all-year-round. So in many ways, you can be one of the food bowls of Australia. But we just want to give the farmers a better say and that's what we are doing with the irrigation.

JOURNALIST: The Turkish President has again played the Christchurch shooting video. How can you believe that he was misquoted, as he said, when he is continuing to play this video?

SHORTEN: I've seen reports of that this morning. That's deeply frustrating. The Turkish officials, I complained to them and I supported Mr Morrison in the same process. They said that it had been misquoted, that there is Turkish elections. I think they conclude in the next eight days or several days. I certainly would expect that once the election was over that things are normalised again. There's no excuse for disrespecting our ANZACS. Of course, I also wonder if there is an element of domestic politics being played out here with those shocking scenes in Christchurch. And I would expect our relations to improve, but it is disturbing to see the images being repeatedly replayed. It's not on, it's not appropriate and it's not the basis of the relationship which we've had really since the end of the First World War with the modern Republic of Turkey.
JOURNALIST: The Christchurch shooter was active on social media platforms in far right groups for quite a while before the terrorist attack. How could have this gone unnoticed by Australia's intelligence agencies (inaudible)?
SHORTEN: I think that's a pretty important point. I think the security agencies do need to explain how they're monitoring the far-right. I know that they've been monitoring some of them but clearly this fellow hasn't attracted the attention of security agencies in Australia or New Zealand. We need to make sure that that never happens again. And I believe that we need to put more resources into combating the extreme right. They've proven that their ideology is just as hateful as any of the other extremism we see around the world. There's no excuse for them not getting the same attention. They proved how dreadful what they can do is. I also think there's a challenge here for the social media platforms. There's so much information on social media that it can't just be left to our security agencies. I'm certainly calling in all the major social media platforms, the global multinationals. They make a lot of money out of Australia, they make a lot of money selling their business model. The business model of Facebook and Google is that they tell advertisers that they can tell you anything about the users. They can tell you what the users eat for breakfast, they can tell you what the kids are watching online, they can tell you, you know, the shopping habits of the users. But when it comes to detecting evil far right extremists, they go missing. So it's not good enough for them to say after the event that they shut it down. I'm still incredibly angry that a million and a half views occurred of the live streaming of the atrocity, and I haven't had a sufficient explanations from the big companies about why they can't stop that happening. You know, if they've got the technology to create social media platforms and algorithms then they've got the technology, in my opinion, to prevent the abuse of it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, great see you in Tasmania but why aren't you in New South Wales helping Labor's campaign?
SHORTEN: Because the election's today. I've been up in New South Wales. I have to say at midday on election day, there's not much more you can do to sort out the voting there. What I do think. and I just want to say to Michael Daley, Penny Sharpe and the Labor team, that you entered the election as underdogs, you've fought a very strong campaign. They've got the job against them, but I think that the fact that Michael Daley's slogan of putting better hospitals and schools before stadiums, I think that resonates. But at this point, your guess is as good as mine about what will happen. It's in the hands of the voters, and we will find out some point after 6 o’clock about who's running the state government in New South Wales.

JOURNALIST: Do you feel your presences wouldn't help Labor there? Do you feel you presence detracts from Labor -

SHORTEN: No, I was pleased to campaign there. It was very nice of New South Wales Labor to ask me to speak at the launch of their campaign. At least one major party leader go to address the people.

JOURNALIST: Labor MPs in New South Wales have admitted that they have had a poor week of campaigning. Can Michael Daley recover, do you believe?

SHORTEN: We'll find out. At this point, your guess is as good as mine. So we'll see, but it's now in the hands of the voters.

JOURNALIST: Do you see this state election as a test run for the federal election?

SHORTEN: I think there's plenty of federal issues which will be the subject of the federal election. I think a lot of these New South Wales state issues were fought on state matters, stadiums and whatnot. What I do think will be important in New South Wales in the federal election is the fact that everything's going up except your wages. What I find when I was even campaigning at the state level, be it in the south coast of New South Wales or be it in Western Sydney, what we're seeing all around the place is that everything is going up except your wages. Do you know now the out0of-pocket costs to see a GP has gone up about 25 per cent under the Liberals? The out-of-pocket cost to go and see a specialist has gone up by 40 per cent. Let's not even talk about power bills. Every time you open it, it's a walk on the wild side to see what the power companies are sending you under this government as a bill. Wages have stagnated. That's why I think Labor's bigger, better tax cuts for working people, I think will resonate well in the federal election. One thing I am hearing, not just in New South Wales but all around Australia, is people want to see more action on climate change, they want to see the cuts to hospitals and schools reversed, and they want to see us standing up for middle and working class families which is what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: On climate change, why is it taking Labor so long to say if it will use carbon carry-over credits?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, if we're going to talk about why it's taken so long for a political party to do something, why has it taken six years for this government to still do nothing at all when they're in government on climate change? I mean, if the Liberals wanted to do anything on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister, wouldn't he? I mean they're now on their 12th energy policy. What I can promise you, and I can promise Australians, is we will reveal the full detail of our climate policy before the election and it'll be one policy for while we're in government with one Prime Minister. Some of the measures we've already announced though just to refresh people's memories is we're committed to 50 per cent of our energy mix by 2030 coming from renewable energy. We have said we want to reduce carbon pollution or greenhouse gas emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. We've also said to Australians, there is two million households already have solar panels on the roof, that we want to help them be able to defray the cost of putting in batteries so they can get more energy. One thing I do recognise about the Kyoto credits point is that some other countries have moved away from using that, as a form of our calculation, the United Kingdom, Germany, New Zealand, Sweden, Denmark, and we're seriously considering that option and we'll have more to say in coming weeks.

JOURNALIST: On the AFL, the state Government is starting a taskforce to lobby for a Tas-AFL team. Labor has already made a funding commitment of seed funding. The $25 million that you've committed, would that be available for the AFL (inaudible) or a specific condition attached to how that is used?

SHORTEN: We want to see, listen, I'm an AFL fan, although Collingwood was a little unlucky last night. It's alright, it's only the start of the season. But, we've said that we would put $25 million aside provided the AFL came to the party. But we don't want that being a fly in-fly out team, we want to see it based in Tasmania. That's why we've also invested $5 million, if we get elected, in grassroots footy. I understand that the challenge we need is to make sure that we've got the young ones coming through. In fact, I'm just happy if the young ones play footy. I'm happy if they never go on to play AFL but they get to play in a team, learn teamwork, learn to you know run around outside not just sitting on a screen. But I also get that we've got to help replenish the local leagues with support for change rooms for women, better amenities and facilities, so the football experience in the developmental stages is a good experience. So we’ve got $5 million for that and that's going to help local clubs. But it is the sort of the great white whale, the Moby Dick issue of AFL is why can't Tasmania have a team? So my government, if elected, would put $25 million, it's got to be matched by the AFL. But we want the AFL to do it in conjunction with Tassie footy, and we want to make sure that that investment's occurring here, not elsewhere.

JOURNALIST: So could some of that money from Labor be used to upgrade the Bellerive oval?

SHORTEN: Well, let's see what the business case for the team is first. I don't want to run a football club, I want to run Australia. I'll leave that to the experts. But what I want to see in Tassie is grassroots footy. You've got a very strong tradition, but what we've got to do is make sure that the grassroots are functioning well, and that's women's football as well as men's football and the junior teams. But I'm sure we can get it right in terms of amenities and facilities, but it's got to start with Tassie football.

JOURNALIST: Is it time the AFL gave Tasmania a clear answer (inaudible)? Should they stop stringing Tasmania along?
SHORTEN: I think Tasmanians are in two minds. I think they would all like the idea of a genuinely local AFL team, but I think they're just as concerned about grassroots footy. And I think there's an attitude which is we’ll believe it when we see it. So I've got a couple of propositions for Tasmanian footy lovers. One, if you want to see more junior teams supported, vote Labor. If you want to see more women's footy, vote Labor. If you want to see investment in grassroots footy, vote Labor. I will work with Tasmanian footy and our Tasmanian MPs. We will say to the AFL: time to get serious. But you know, if you want the AFL to get serious, you need a friend in Canberra to make sure they get serious about Tassie football. I’m that man.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Banking Royal Commission, do you support the Government's plan to create a new division in the federal court system to include criminal prosecutions for the sector?

SHORTEN: We're open to this idea but you've got to ask yourself, why has it taken the Government so long to do these measures? I mean, they didn't have to vote against a Banking Royal Commission 26 times. This government, for the last three years, has spent a lot of political time and effort trying to give a $17 billion tax cut to the banks. So you know, now they want to look like they're the good guys after they voted against the Banking Royal Commission 26 times, after wanting to give $17 billion in tax cuts to the banks. Now they want to look like the good guys, after they cut money from the corporate regulators? Just imagine if they hadn't cut money from the regulators, maybe some of the problems that we saw in the Banking Royal Commission wouldn't have occurred. So really, it comes down to this fundamental question: who do you trust, six weeks out from the next election, to keep the banks honest? Do you trust the current crew, who cut money from the regulator, who voted against the Banking Royal Commission 26 times and wanted to give $17 billion away to them? Or do you trust Labor, who have been the party who pushed for the Banking Royal Commission, without which we would have never uncovered so many of the scandals? Is there one last question?

JOURNALIST: Could I have one more on AFL?

SHORTEN: Sure.

JOURNALIST: If you're elected at the federal election, would Federal Labor be  willing to work with the Tasmanian Liberal state government in a bipartisan way to get up an AFL team?

SHORTEN: Listen, it is the local government down here that has said they want to put $70 million into tranche three of the irrigation and it's a Labor Opposition who's got on the plane, courtesy of my local Labor MPs, and said we've got to back this. For me, it's about putting the farmers first, politics second. The same goes with footy. The reality is that it was in Justine's campaign in Braddon, where we made the commitment to AFL funding. If the Tasmanian Government's fair dinkum, I'll work with them. See, the sort of government I want to lead is not one where we assume we have all the answers. We've got our policies, we're being upfront with people. And yes, I make no apologies for being pro-action on climate change, pro-making sure that your wages get moving, pro-making sure you can afford to see a doctor and pro-making sure your kids get a good quality education. But I'll work with anyone who wants to see Tasmania get ahead, wants to see Australia get ahead, and I'll work with different levels of government. That's my track record.

JOURNALIST: Can I bring you back, one more question, to today's announcement. What are you offering that the Liberal Morrison Government hasn't already offered?

SHORTEN: They haven't offered to do the third tranche of the irrigation funding.

JOURNALIST: Is it not king of expected they would given they funded the first two?

SHORTEN: Oh mate, well sorry, it was the Labor government who funded the initial tranche. Listen, Mr Morrison's welcome to copy us. That's okay, that's politics. This is what's so interesting about Labor being so competitive in the federal election, and it is what's so good about having such a crack-team of federal MPs, is that we're leading. It's a very unusual dynamic in Australian politics where the Opposition goes first and the Government plays catch up. But that's been the story of the last five years, more often than not, especially when it comes to Tasmania. Thank you.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. I am going to utter some words I didn't think I'd say as Labor leader: It's great to be here in the seat of Higgins campaigning to encourage people to vote Labor at the next election. Higgins has always been a Liberal seat ever since its creation. But Labor is running, and I'm pleased to announce, Labor's new candidate, one of the most credentialed women that the Labor Party, and indeed Australian politics, has had as a candidate. I'm pleased to say that Fiona McLeod SC is going to be Labor's candidate in the upcoming federal election for the seat of Higgins. Before I talk about Fiona's remarkable list of accomplishments and why this is such an exciting development for the voters in Higgins and indeed across Australia, I want to acknowledge the outgoing Labor candidate, Josh Spiegel. He is a young man with a bright future in front of him and I think it reflects very well of him that he saw and recognised that the almost unique opportunity that Fiona McLeod represents to Australian politics was a reason for him to stand aside on this occasion. He is a young man with a very bright future. But what we have today is Labor can unveil a new candidate for Higgins. This is a sign of how seriously we're taking the election in Higgins. Traditionally it's been a safe Liberal seat but there is a mood of change across Victoria and across Australia. So Labor is very fortunate to be able to present Fiona McLeod as our new flag bearer for Labor in Higgins. Fiona is a senior counsel, she's been president of the Australian Law Council, president of the Australian Bar Association. There are not many firsts in her career as a barrister that Fiona hasn't accomplished. She's worked on important public law. She's been handling cases in our human trafficking, slavery, to stand up for victims. Fiona has been running important public cases throughout her legal career. She's been leading the human trafficking cases to stand up for vulnerable women. She's done a lot of the work in the cases to do with flood damage, to do with bushfires. She's been conducting the class action on behalf of victims in the Murrindindi Shire. I'll let Fiona talk more about some of her accomplishments in a moment. But the fact that Fiona McLeod is willing to run in such a uphill battle, speaks volumes for her personal commitment to being a representative in the Parliament but also, what I think it reflects is this mood for change. In the seat of Higgins and right across Victorian, right across Australia, increasingly people are saying they're sick of the instability of the current Government. They're looking for stability. They also want to see women take their rightful place as equal partners in the Australian political process. One of the challenges is that the outgoing member Kelly O'Dwyer, she was a woman in a political party which hasn't done a lot to promote women and she was a representative in a political party who hasn't done enough on climate change. Of course Fiona represents all of the things which Kelly O'Dwyer couldn't accomplish. She's going to be a woman in a political party who values women. She's going to be a candidate in a party who wants to take real action on climate change and she'll be a candidate for a party which has great stability in its conduct and going forward to the election. So Fiona McLeod SC; Labor's new candidate, an exciting development, a highly credentialed woman running in the seat of Higgins, one of the most highly credentialed women we've had run in Australian politics. Why don't I handover to her to talk a little bit more about why she's running then we can take some questions.
FIONA MCLEOD SC, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR HIGGINS: Thank you very much and thank you very much, Bill for that really warm, embracing welcome. I'm absolutely delighted to be here today and to have this opportunity to represent the people of Higgins in the upcoming election. It's been something that has been on my radar for a little while and in my work as a lawyer, I've been very conscious of the need for decent people to be in politics working to make a better Australia for all of us. I want to thank you, Bill, for your warm embrace and your welcome into the Labor fold. I have had a number of conversations with Bill and I found him to be warm, intelligent and authentic and I thank you very much for your welcome. I want to thank Josh Spiegel too for your gracious and generous note on standing aside. I really hope that we can work together and I look forward to Josh standing beside me as we walk through the streets of Higgins, to benefit from his strong campaigning so far and the work that his volunteers and the local members have undertaken so far. So why would I with my 30 years nearly in practice as a barrister and my focus on individual cases want to step away from the courtroom and step into the hurly-burly of politics? Why would I want to give that up? It seems to me that we are at a tipping point in our nation and we have some hard choices to make. I look at my daughters and I wonder what world we are leaving for them, what planet are we leaving behind for them. And I realise it's time for a government that is serious on climate change. Only Labor can deliver that seriousness about climate change and what we need to do to address this fundamental and existential threat. I have been concerned for some time about both a strong economy and some serious social issues. I have been concerned that we have failed to address our First Nations and their rightful place in Australia. To shut down the conversation about the Uluru Statement from the Heart was a deep disappointment to me and I am confident that we will move forward with a serious and respectful conversation about what needs to happen on the path to a referendum. And I've seen the growing inequality in Australia. I've seen what needs to be done so that those who are vulnerable can stand up and be included, fully participate with the rest of us. Those who are missing out on proper health care. Those who are missing out on proper educational opportunities. And only Labor can provide these things. It is a great honour to me to be included in the team. I'll be walking these streets every day until the election and I look forward to the support of the local branches who I'll be talking to later today. I look forward to the endorsement that I hope will come on Monday and I look forward to meeting you all, the people of Higgins. This is a sacred trust. Public office is a sacred trust. I take that responsibility very seriously and I'll be looking forward to delivering for you should I have that trust, in Canberra. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks Fiona. Good words. Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: It's a question for Fiona. How long have you been a member of the Labor Party and why Labor?

MCLEOD: So I've joined the Labor Party last week, so Sunday, I joined but I've been associated with Labor for a long, long time. My godfather was the former state Attorney General, actually a Labor Attorney General and his influence runs right throughout my life. His commitment to principles of fairness for people who are vulnerable, his social policies and particularly, his commitment to the Uluru.

JOURNALIST: Who is that, sorry?

MCLEOD: Andrew McCutcheon his name was, he was a state Attorney General and Minister for Housing in the Cain Government. There are a number of people who in my life, who've been strong mentors from the Labor side and I've supported Labor candidates at the last several elections. So I have a strong connection to Labor and its principles. As the chair of Transparency International and doing political work through our legal professional membership bodies, it was appropriate for me to remain above politics and not to join at that time. But I have been a longstanding supporter

JOURNALIST: Labor got less than 15 per cent of the primary vote in Higgins three years ago. What has changed so dramatically that you think you could actually win?

SHORTEN: What happened to Malcolm Turnbull? I'll tell you what's changed in the last three years, we're on our third Liberal Prime Minister. They are just an unstable rabble. Wherever you go - and you know I'm a Victorian - wherever I went in Victoria over the summer past, people would come up to me and say 'Bill, I'm a lifelong Liberal'. They don't agree with everything that we're saying but they say 'for goodness sakes, can't we just have one Prime Minister for three years' and they acknowledge that we are the party of stability. I think also what's changed is people are fed up with inaction on climate change. This government, if you've thought that the LNP or the Liberals could do anything on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. The fact that he's not Prime Minister shows you this government is broken at its core and can't act on climate change. I also think what's changing in Victoria, but not just Victoria, is people want to see a better deal for women and they want to see more women in Parliament. So when you look at it, stability versus Liberal instability, Labor climate change versus Liberal inaction on climate change, and of course, Labor's excellent track record at generating more women MPs, and we've got the fabulous Penny Wong and Tanya Plibersek in my leadership for example. And now, the outstanding Fiona McLeod as our candidate. We're competitive. You're quite right though, Higgins is a hard seat to win but what Labor wants to do is put up the best possible candidates and that's what we're doing today.

JOURNALIST: When it comes to how to vote cards will you be putting One Nation last on all of those cards?

SHORTEN: Yes. I can say again today that the Labor Party will preference the Liberals ahead of One Nation. One Nation - or, I mean if there's three different extreme right wing parties one of them goes last, one of  them goes second last, one of them goes third last. But as the general principle we're putting the extremists at the bottom. And even though you know, Scott Morrison I don't see eye to eye on many issues I accept that the Liberal Party is a much more mainstream party, although it's got some unfortunate tendencies to the right. So I think it's just sensible that the main democratic parties of this country preference to each other before we go to the extremists. I think though that Mr Morrison now has to demonstrate a true test of leadership. Put the country first, put One Nation last. If he can't do that then I think that they've got a real problem and I think we all know what's really happening and we saw Mr Morrison and the interview last night on Channel 10. People can make up their own mind what they thought of his performance but there is one question that Mr Morrison, the Liberals and the Nationals cannot escape. What arrangements, deals, above board or below the table, secret or not secret, are they going to strike with One Nation? What we all know about Mr Morrison and his evasive answers last night about this question of preferencing One Nation ahead of Labor. What we know is this, the Liberals and Mr Morrison want to do a deal with One Nation, want to put One Nation higher up in their preferences but they're too ashamed to admit it publicly. They're too ashamed to admit it publicly. I think that Mr Morrison if he keeps failing this test our leadership is hoping that he can get towards the very end of the election and sneak through but actually not put One Nation and like-minded parties last. I don't think the people of Australia are going to buy that evasion or secrecy.
JOURNALIST: Your candidate has just said that climate change is an existential threat. Why is Labor still considering using a so called accounting trick to meet its emissions targets?

SHORTEN: Well, be a bit fair in your question I've said that we're taking that question on notice and we're going to announce our policy on climate change before the next election. We've already I think, even our harshest critics would say we've already put out more policies than anyone’s seen in two generations. For example we've committed to 50 per cent renewables in our energy mix by 2030. We've committed to 45 per cent greenhouse gas emission reduction reducing the carbon pollution by 2030. We've said we want to get to zero net carbon pollution emissions by 2050. We've said that we want to make sure that we encourage more renewables for consumers. Two million Australian households already have solar panels on their roofs. We want to encourage the roll out of solar batteries so that people can use that energy in the evenings and at other times and to put downward pressure on consumer energy prices.
JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison says Sally McManus has been attending Shadow Cabinet meetings. I think Sally has denied that online what's the truth and would that be appropriate?

SHORTEN: I would have thought the last day in the world that Mr Morrison wanted to talk about what happened at a Shadow Cabinet meeting would have been today after his own people are contradicting each other and him. No, Ms McManus hasn't attended a Shadow Cabinet meeting, that's just wrong but I think that the reason why he's trying to make up porky pies about Labor is because Mr Hunt, the embattled and beleaguered Member for Flinders has actually belled the cat. Where he recently denied that Mr Morrison said anything wrong about Muslims but back in 2011 when the story came out Mr Hunt said he wasn't at the meeting.  Like, Mr Hunt were you at the meeting or weren't you? And if you weren't at the meeting how do you know what Mr Morrison said firsthand? But anyway no Ms McManus, we'll talk to all people business, unions, consumer groups, environmental groups but we're not going to be the servant of any sector, of any sector of the Australian economy rather we'll be the servant of the people.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of Scott Morrison's $2 billion dollar announcement to build a high speed rail between Melbourne and Geelong? Good idea, will Labor match it?

SHORTEN: Well as I said, I've lived in Victoria for half a century. It's almost like he's declared the elections on isn't it? How do you know when there's going to be a federal election,  the Liberal Party discover infrastructure in Victoria. What a coincidence. You know last financial year were you aware that in Victoria the Government spent $7 out of every hundred it spent nationally. So Victorian public infrastructure, courtesy of the Liberal's Sydney-centric MP's we've had-  Abbott, Turnbull and Morrison - last year we got seven cents in every dollar that was spent nationally. So I think it's too little too late. We love the idea of fast rail but of course Mr Morrison you know a bit sneaky said, I'll actually only have $40 million for a $4000 million project and then what he said is I'll spend more so long as Victorian Government does. So you know, this this bloke's got more out clauses than an insurance contract.

JOURNALIST: So  you've got two though, high speed rails are now being discussed for Melbourne one to Geelong one all the way up to Brisbane. Which of these if any will Labor commit to?

SHORTEN: There's been a lot more work done on the high speed rail between Melbourne and Brisbane. The real issue for me when it comes to Geelong and I'm not going to bury any idea no matter how fortuitous the timing is for the Liberals six weeks before an election. The real issue is that on the other side of Geelong from Armstrong's Creek right along the coast we've seen massive suburban expansion. What we want to do is make sure that the train services between the Surf Coast and Geelong are better. We want to make sure that we work with the Victorian Government. You can't do public transport in Victoria just from Canberra, you've got to work with the state men and women. We'll talk to the Andrews Government we're very committed to the outer metropolitan ring rail that Mr Andrews has been talking about. But let's go back to the reason why you're asking these questions. It's six weeks out from an election, the Morrison-Turnbull-Abbott Governments have cruelly neglected Victorian infrastructure, spending only 7 per cent of the national infrastructure spend last financial year in Victoria. They want everyone to forget what they haven't done and pretend that six weeks before an election they've changed their stripes. Well the people aren't so easily fooled.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Pauline Hanson is a racist?

SHORTEN: I think some of the things that she's said have been racist. I don't think that Islam is a cancer. I think some of the things she's said don't reflect the thinking of mainstream Australia.

JOURNALIST: What do you think about Michael McCormack urging now people to put the Greens last?

SHORTEN: Oh well, the National Party they're more lost than Burke and Wills. There are just wandering around trying to get any attention they can. Listen, whatever people think about the Greens and I'm, you know, I have many disagreements, I don't accept that the Greens are an extreme racially motivated party. I don't buy that. I don't agree with a lot of them, that's why we're running Fiona McLeod, we want you to vote for us not the Green political party - but I think for the conservatives to start contrasting the Greens to Fraser Anning I don't buy that at all. I don't think you buy it. I don't think most Australians buy it.

JOURNALIST: Just on IFM Investors, is a bonus of $26 million there abouts okay?
SHORTEN: I'm not familiar with the issue.

JOURNALIST: Why don't we know? Shouldn't industry funds disclose what their executives are getting given the ethos and criticism of CEO bonuses (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, I still don't know any more than I did before your last question. But on the general issue of executive bonuses yeah I think they can be too high. I think there should be transparency generally. Of course that's why Labor didn't support, didn't support tax cuts for big business. It's why Labor pushed for the Banking Royal Commission to expose poor behaviour. It's why we voted 26 times in favour of a Banking Royal Commission and the government didn't. More transparency in reporting is always desirable.

JOURNALIST:  Will you be swapping preferences with the Greens in this seat?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I mean we do that, we've put forward a recommendation the Victorian branch will work that through. But if there's an implication somehow there is something special - Labor intends to win the election. We're not going to form coalitions with the Greens or anyone else. But again let's get back to the heart of why preferences is the issue today. Mr Morrison faces a test of leadership doesn't he. He needs to decide will he put the country first or the extremist right wing parties first, because you can't do both. And Mr Morrison I think, should do the same as I'm saying. So I don't want Mr Morrison to win the election, we want to win it, but one thing's for sure I don't want to see the extremists get a bigger toehold in Australian politics. That's why Labor will do what I think most Australians expect us to do which is we'll put the Liberals ahead of the extreme right wingers.

JOURNLAIST: Another one from left field here, should Tina Arena be appointed to the Australia Council Board?

SHORTEN:  You know I haven't given that a lot of thought. I like her music, I'm not the sort of fanboy that the current Prime Minister is but that's fair enough. In terms of appointments to these committees I think the more transparent we can do it, the more arm's length the better. She's a very well credentialed Australian. Her parents live in my electorate.

JOURNALIST: Can I just get one for Fiona?

SHORTEN: Yeah sure mate.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned that you were disappointed about the Coalition’s response to the voice statement, do you agree with the idea of having a representative body for Indigenous people? McLEOD: Yes I do. I support the idea of a representative body to parliament and the mischief that's been said about this is that that representative body would somehow be a third chamber of parliament, which is ridiculous and it's just wrong. What we need to do is have a process that empowers our first peoples.  Empowers them to speak directly to those in power and the Uluru Statement of the Heart lays out that pathway. It lays out a respectful, inclusive pathway and it's one we should be looking to follow.

JOURNALIST: Fiona do you live in the seat of Higgins? McLEOD: No I don't.

JOURNALIST: Where do you live? McLEOD: I live outside, I live in Fitzroy I used to live next door and certainly I'll be listening to the people of Higgins as to whether they think that's appropriate. But I'd love to live here and in fact we've already started that conversation.
JOURNALIST: If you are elected then that gives you three years or so to move here, so will you commit to moving here if you are elected then? McLEOD: Yes, I would very seriously consider it and I've already started the conversation -

JOURNALIST: That's not a commitment though is it? McLEOD: Well I've got family to consider and I would be very keen to move.

JOURNALIST: Do you see that as a disadvantage? I mean people often like to look to a local candidate who's been living in the community and understands local issues. McLEOD: Yeah I do understand that people might have a concern about that and the people of Higgins have to come first and so if that is a concern, that's repeatedly raised with me that would weigh very heavily in my decision about that and the decisions I take about where and when we move. I want to remind you that my view is that it's the people of Higgins and what they want that has to come first.

SHORTEN: Thanks everybody, are there any other questions? So I just want to say to the voters of Higgins and right across Victorian Australia. We have got a highly credentialed woman barrister running for parliament yet again highlighting Labor's commitment to ensure diversity, but in Higgins we're saying to the voters here we're taking your vote incredibly serious and we're presenting to you an almost unique candidate in Australian politics and I think it will be very exciting. Thanks everybody.

PREMIER MARK MCGOWAN: Good morning everyone. Today we held a historic joint meeting of the State Cabinet and the Federal Shadow Cabinet, and we had some very good discussion between Bill Shorten's team and my team. It was very important in the lead up to the federal election a few weeks away that we have those joint communications and discuss issues of relevance and importance to the people of Western Australia. I know if Bill Shorten is elected Prime Minister, he will be the Prime Minister for the entire country, especially Western Australia. As Bill has shown, and as his team have shown, they have a real interest in our state, a commitment to fixing the GST, commitment to infrastructure in WA, and he has been here on 38 occasions since he's been the Federal Opposition Leader - which must be some sort of record. He and the team, and my team, discussed important issues to Western Australia. Whether it was health or education, economic development, federal-state relations, domestic violence, you name it, we had important conversations about those issues and it was very good to allow my team to brief the federal team on state government policies and programs and also indicate that we want to work constructively with a Shorten Labor Government if they're elected in a couple of months’ time. I was very pleased to be briefed that today, Bill will be announcing important developments for Western Australia including a national mining centre to be based here in WA, and also additional indigenous rangers to work on conservation land across Western Australia, and also some additional funding facilities for aged care. As we've seen the Federal Opposition has made the difficult decisions that have allowed them to fund important projects across the state, especially here in Western Australia. And during the course of this week we've seen announcements around health infrastructure, support for drug addiction, and important mining and other announcements. So I'm very pleased with all of these announcements and very pleased that Bill and the team have come to Western Australia. I'll now hand over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody and thank you Premier Mark McGowan for hosting a historic meeting, a joint cabinet meeting of the West Australian Government and the Federal Shadow Cabinet. You know, we had the meeting today and it was a good exchange of ideas and views, a discussion about a vision for Western Australia. I actually think we need to see more of this across the nation - the different levels of government working together. That's what I can promise West Australians - that if I'm elected Prime Minister in six or seven weeks, you're going to see more cooperation and more making sure that Western Australia gets its fair share. I'm really pleased to announce that amongst the matters which were agreed on and discussed today, we've got some exciting new initiatives which will help secure the future of the West economically and in terms of jobs. The third thing, which, is of course mining. Western Australia is a mining colossus. It is an oil and gas and mining colossus. With 11 per cent of the Australian population, Western Australia contributes 40 per cent of our exports, and mining and oil and gas are at the centre of this. So what Federal Labor will do is after consulting with industry, we're going to set up an Australian Future Mine Centre. We're going to get the smartest people in Australia, from the CSIRO and Geoscience Australia, working with industry in this centre to help properly map our natural resources. For a country that's made its money on mining, we haven't explored all of the resources. We have two thirds of Australia, of our resources are unknown, but with the advent of better technology and scientific breakthroughs, we can actually find out what our future is in terms of resources in this country. That'll be $46 million of which a Federal Labor Government will contribute $23 million. But it doesn't stop there. See, Western Australia is not just a mining and resources place, it's a diverse economy and one of the fastest growing areas for jobs in the west is of course aged care and disability. The experts say that in the next three years, four years, we are going to need an extra 10,000 people for the positions created by the National Disability Insurance Scheme and better support for Australians as they grow older - 10,000 jobs in the west which we're going to need to fill, and I want to see Western Australians fill these positions. So we're going to invest in three separate TAFEs to build the training complexes we need to provide the training for our future aged care workforce. That'll be at Mount Lawley, Joondalup, and Rocky. So if you want to look for a job in aged care and NDIS, courtesy of Federal Labor working with the McGowan Government, we'll make sure you've got the skills to be part of that new wave of jobs. Of course the regions are very important, and our First Australians. So we're going to double our commitment to the very successful Indigenous ranger program. This will lead to hundreds of extra positions being created for Indigenous Australians, many of whom are in remote communities and on country, in aquaculture and agriculture, making sure we are environmentally sustainable. Of course another issue which we spoke about, which is unfortunately not where there's a lot of good news, it's not good news at all, is the challenging and vexed area of domestic violence. It is an epidemic. Western Australia sadly has the second highest rates of domestic violence fatalities - there were 28 last year, up from 11 the year before. We must do better. Now Mark McGowan's taking a lead on this - an overdue lead on this for Western Australia. So we're going to work closely with our national programs to make sure that West Australian women are safe and we can do better at this. We've got an $88 million national program for new refuges. We're going to make sure that 10 days paid domestic violence leave is put into awards so that we can make sure that if you need that time to just try and recover, help your kids, do all the dreadfully complex financial matters if you're the victim of domestic violence, that your work doesn't suffer. We're going to invest in 20,000 flexible support packages. They are amounts of money running to several thousand dollars which will be available across the country, so that people who just need the help to leave. No woman should stay in an abusive violent relationship because she doesn't have the money to leave. So these four areas- new research for our mining sector, training indigenous ranges on country, providing the TAFE facilities so that we can train the disability and aged care workforce of the future, and on domestic violence, we want to make sure that Western Australian women get a fair go. These are the sort of exciting initiatives that a McGowan Labor government in the West can do, and a federal Labor government can do in Canberra by working together. I mean the summary of this ladies and gentlemen, is that I will fight for Western Australia. I will work with Western Australia to make sure Western Australia gets a fair deal, and these exciting announcements today are a down payment on what we can expect with a more cooperative, functioning, government system in this country. Happy to take questions along with Mark.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are these initiatives all affordable, fully funded or - we're clearly in campaign mode mode now, so cross crossing the country dropping millions here and there, is there a danger this election campaign will send Australia broke?

SHORTEN: Well let's not be cavalier about our announcements and it's an important question but I don't accept the assumption that these are just drops or issues, or just election matters. Ever since I became leader of the Labor Party I've said that violence against women, domestic violence has to be a national issue. So this is part of Labor DNA to tackle domestic violence, and the McGowan Government's already doing it. We've costed our promises because we've made economic reform decisions. We've decided that we want to have better jobs not bigger tax loopholes. When it comes to mining this is a very judicious use of $23 million to enable, to facilitate, to exponentially improve the opportunities for mining, oil and gas across the nation, of which Western Australia is such a key part. Doubling the number of Indigenous rangers, it’s not the most expensive policy you've heard - but we know it works. We want to create real jobs for Indigenous Australians. And of course training the workforce for the future, each of these TAFE facilities we're going to upgrade is about $1.85 million, but when we know that we've got 10,000 positions to fill in the west, how smart would it be not to provide the TAFE facilities? And this is the secret of TAFE, which this Government never understands, the Federal Government. TAFE is a marvellous engine room for retraining people. Come with me someday and visit the TAFEs, see the mature age workers who've come back from having kids go back into the workforce. Come to me when we go to the various TAFEs and see young people learning to be the tradespeople of the future. The beauty of these announcements is actually they don't cost that much. But I think they go to significant areas of the fair go: apprenticeships, First Australians, backing in science and research in mining, and of course domestic violence. As for our other initiatives in health, and roads, and METROnet - Western Australia hasn't been getting its fair share in the past. I make no apology for saying that when Western Australians pay their tax to Canberra they should reasonably expect a reinvestment. I want Western Australians when they're sick to be looked after in 21st Century hospitals, not 20th Century hospitals. I want to make sure that you have proper public transport so that you're not stuck in congestion. You do deserve to see your roads and your freeways expanded - you've had the population growth. I mean the problem in Australia is that the infrastructure hasn't kept pace with the population. There have been too many cuts to hospitals, too many cuts to schools, not enough investment in rail, not enough investment in roads, not enough investment in aged care. So what we're doing is we're making up for six years of neglect, of Coalition negligence.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten and Premier McGowan, can I ask as part of your joint-cabinet meeting, was there any questions raised about the EPA decision earlier in the week and were there any definitions sorted about what Labor's emissions policy would be going forward and what would be responsible?

MCGOWAN: We discussed economic matters and the importance of the mining industry and the importance of the oil and gas in Western Australia. And I was very clear that the industry is incredibly important for jobs and jobs growth in our state. So that was very clear and we had a good conversation about that with both Bill and Jason Clare expressing their support for the mining industry and for our LNG industry in the future in Western Australia. As Bill said yesterday, obviously our decision in relation - or the agreed position, reached by the state and the EPA was the right course of action. And ensuring that that issue was put back out for consultation was the right course of action. And we think that there needs to be a more national approach in relation to these issues. And as I've said repeatedly over the last few weeks, one of the great tragedies of the last 10 years of Australian politics is what Tony Abbott did to national climate policy. But I think there is now a groundswell of opinion across the country that there needs to be a national approach to these issues. So I think there's a lot of agreement between Federal and State Labor this issue. I think the Liberal Party, if you want me to be a little bit political, they are totally divided. They have no idea what they think on those issues. They have no idea where they're going on those issues. And that is that is very disappointing for the whole country.

SHORTEN: Nick, three points - one, Premier Mark McGowan has handled this issue very well I think. Two, there should be a national greenhouse emissions policy. And three, the current government's incapable of coming up with a national greenhouse emissions policy. We'll have more to say closer to the election. But how on earth can states and regulators and businesses, one jurisdiction around Australia, be expected to be able to predict everything when we've got a government in Canberra who provides no policy certainty. When you are chaotic and divided and you lack policy certainty, it makes life harder for every other Australian.

JOURNALIST: Should Australia move back its ambassador from Ankara?

SHORTEN: I've contacted Prime Minister Morrison this morning and offered my support for a joint approach. Let me just go to the trigger for why you asked the question. I think the remarks of the Turkish President were foolish and they were offensive. Like many Australians, I have relatives who fought in the First World War and some of whom were at Gallipoli. In 2015, I attended the 100 year centenary. Australians respect very much their relationship with Turkey. Now my view is that I would rather the current President of Turkey channel the remarks of the founder of the modern Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk - and I just want to say to Australians that this has been the attitude of Turkey and it's lasted us 100 years of good relationship since the end of the First World War - and he said this - it's inscribed at ANZAC Cove: “You are now lying in the soil of a friendly country. Therefore rest in peace. You, the mothers who sent their sons here, away from far away countries, wipe away your tears. After having lost their lives in this land they have become our sons as well.” That generosity of spirit by the founder of the modern Republic of Turkey, that's what I think should influence both Australia and Turkey's relationship. It's a strong relationship. I too have spoken to the Turkish Ambassador in Australia. I've expressed the Federal Opposition's rejection of those remarks. What I also understand though - and this might provide some comfort for Australians who are upset by these remarks - is that there is an election in Turkey, a domestic election within the next 10 days. It is not unknown for domestic politicians in domestic elections to say inflammatory things about matters beyond their borders. But I think we also should recognise that - and it's not an excuse for the remarks - but  if you're a person of the Muslim faith and you read online, in the social media the sort of crazed comments of this killer - you too would be affected by it wherever you are. So I think there is a lesson here beyond the remarks of today, there's a lesson here for all of us: We in Australia do not want or expect to be judged by the actions of a single deranged Australian. We don't think our country should be judged by the standards of that man. But perhaps there's a lesson also here for us, that when individuals of other faiths act, maybe we shouldn't be so quick to judge the faith and rather, recognise it’s an actions of an individual.

JOURNALIST: DFAT is reviewing travel (inaudible) would it be a shame if Australians are forced to cancel travel to ANZAC Day at Gallipoli?

SHORTEN: Of course it would be a shame. I asked the ambassador, the Turkish Ambassador, his view about the safety of Australians and New Zealanders. He said nothing had changed there but I'll be guided by DFAT's advice. I just want to say to Australians, when it comes to these matters, when other countries, for whatever intemperate or whatever reason, insult our country, then I will work with the Prime Minister of the day and that's what people in Australia expect of us both.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Chamber of Commerce has put out some research on the potential impact of your government, a future government endorsing the ACTU’s living wage and the adverse impact on jobs, and related to that, there's also been a lot of concern about your closeness to some of the militant maritime and construction unions. What can you say about the concerns of people in the business community about wage increases and your relationship with unions?

SHORTEN: Well first of all let's talk about wages. I reject the fairy tale spun by the vested interests of big business which says that reasonable wage rises cause economic dislocation. You know, there was an ad in the newspapers yesterday, I don't know if you saw it in the Financial Review, I don't know if you got to see it. It was 124 economists - 124 professors and doctors of economics who said we need to get wages moving in this country. The Reserve Bank Governor - and I don't think you can call him a shop steward of the MUA, he has said that we need to move on wages. Wage stagnation is without a doubt one of the principal economic problems in this country. Let's be straight about this: corporate profits have gone up in Australia by 45 per cent in the last four years, 45 per cent. Average wages in this country have gone up by 8 per cent. That isn't fair, it's not the way the system should work. Labor has rolled out a series of sensible, measured ideas which we call a wages policy. This current government boasts about low wages being their economic policy. Tell that to millions of Australians who are struggling with the fact that everything is going up except their wages. So I reject that. Now the chamber who you quoted from, they are a trade union for employers. So it's not really a news story that the representative, the union for employers says please don't increase wages - that's what they paid to say. But I can't take a sectoral view, neither of the unions or of the employer groups. I'm interested in the daily lives of Australian families and Western Australian families. I think we've got to get wages moving a bit more. So we've said we'll reverse the penalty rates cut. We're going to clamp down on dodgy labour hire practices. We want subcontractors, independent contractors, small businesses who get ripped off by big contractors - we want to give them more legal protection. So we've got a plan to get wages moving for small business, for workers and for contractors. I think this is sensible because in the current climate, we have anaemic domestic demand, and if people aren't getting wage rises, then they're not spending money in the High Street and confidence shrinks and evaporates. Historic low wage rises, this is a problem.

JOURNALIST: Will you be sticking to the 160,000 migration cap for the next four years if you are elected?

SHORTEN: Yes I've seen that the current Prime Minister has said that you know - he has come out, burst out of the blocks today said look at me, I'm going to say that we're going to have migration at 160,000 people a year. Well it sounds like the sort of cut that you have when you want to pretend you're having a cut, but you also know that you need to have immigration to help the economy grow. I mean this is smoke and mirrors. 160,000 this year, do you know what it was last year? 162,000 - so wow, this government's announced a cut of 1 per cent, you know hold the presses, it's staggering. They want people to go to the regions - tick, that's fine. We've all spoken about that and that's a good idea. But let us not pretend that today was earth shattering news. And the other reason why I find it hard to get too excited about today's announcement, other than the fact it's no different to last year, is that temporary visas which carry work rights, there's no cap on the number of people who come there. That's 1.6 million, going up. So what the government is doing is it’s having a look at one small number and making a 1 per cent change to that, and ignoring the fact that we've got a massively increasing number of temporary work visas. But at the end of the day even with those points, isn't the real issue here that Australians are frustrated that our nation's infrastructure hasn't kept up with population growth. What the government's trying to do here is make a big fuss, a big decorative announcement about not very much at all, and in turn they're trying to hide the fact that they've neglected to invest in our roads and our cities, they've neglected to invest in our public transport in our cities, they've neglected to invest in our schools and our TAFE's, in our universities and they've been cutting hospital funding. The real test, the substantial test is are you investing in the nation's infrastructure to keep up with population growth, and the Morrison Government has substantially failed that fundamental test.

JOURNALIST: So do you think that migrants should be incentivised to move into the regions though?
SHORTEN: We're always happy to look at what schemes get people to the regions. This is not new. Any student of economic history since Federation and before, knows that we've had schemes to try and get people to work in the regions. So this is not news, and it's always proven quite difficult and we'll have a very constructive view about that but again, this is hardly radical. If you want to create jobs in the regions, back in our Indigenous rangers program. If you want to back jobs in the regions, sort out the national energy policy. If you want to back jobs in the region, back our buy Australia procurement plans for Australian made railway stock, in Queensland for example. If you want to back jobs in the regions, back in our plan to make a hydrogen research centre in Gladstone. If you want to back our jobs in the regions, do like we're doing and invest in hospitals in regional Western Australia. I mean, Mark McGowan, he's on the ground. People don't want to go to the regions unless there's a job there. So what we've got to do is create the jobs.

JOURNALIST: Who is leading the cost of flying the entire Shadow Cabinet into Perth this week?

SHORTEN: Well, the same people who meet the cost of flying the entire government around the country. I make no apology for me bringing my team to talk to the West Australian State Government. You know, I think it's important my people are out there. And do you know what's been good about this week? This is the winner, the winners out of this festival of Western Australia are Western Australians. Did you know for instance that we're going to announce greater resources at the Peel Health Campus. That we're going to do more about helping to tackle the ice addiction of Midland through the Midland hospitals, St John of God. That we are going to help provide the Charles Gairdner Hospital, the Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital in Perth with more resources. Did you know that we've said that we're going to back in all these things today but we're also going to do more work in terms of stroke prevention and provide regional hospitals of Western Australia with better help so that they can help treat people who have strokes. We are a party who is, you know ingrained and embedded in what Western Australians want us to do.

JOURNALIST: So that's taxpayers?

MCGOWAN: Can I just comment on that, can I just comment on that? It's a great thing. It's a great thing that Western Australia's getting all this attention - this is what we've been looking for for so long. The whole Shadow Cabinet has come to our state, that is terrific. Announcements being made all over the state, across the city, across the regions, important commitments to hospitals, and to education facilities, to Aboriginal people, to jobs. This is what we've been looking for, for so many years and it's now coming to fruition. So I don’t think we should be critical of the Federal Shadow Cabinet coming to Western Australia. They very well could be the government of Australia in a couple of months’ time.
JOURNALIST: But does it take every Shadow Minister, isn't Bill Shorten enough to make all those announcements?
SHORTEN: I appreciate the compliment inherent in that. Well let's be straight here, politicians in Canberra need to get out of Canberra and travel around. You know this is my 74th day in Western Australia and some might like that, some might not like that, some might not have a view. But you can't work out Western Australia from the East Coast. The last thing West Australians want is wise men and women from the East pontificating on fly-in fly-out day trips telling people what they need. You've got to be on the ground. But if we want to talk about wastage of money, I think we need to ask the Morrison Government why are they spending $200 million on television advertising, boosting the lacklustre achievements of a failing government. If you want to talk about a waste of money, the government's TV advertising campaigns. Every time you and every Western Australian hears another government ad from the Federal Government pumping up their tyres with so little to show for it, that would actually I think, be annoying and frustrating.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten what are the chances of having a West Australian in your Cabinet?

SHORTEN: Good if you can vote for them. We are competitive, people like to ask me here how many seats are you going to win? Well I'm trying to get every vote I can get, everywhere. You know we proposed upgrading and sorting out and renovating and fixing up the Collie Hospital. Now that is theoretically in a Federal Seat which Labor doesn't have any prospects of, but I am a very ambitious fellow for making sure that Labor does as well as we can. So when I come to Western Australia, I don't look at blue seats or red seats, I just see Western Australians, in the regions and of course in Perth. You can't understand Western Australia without understanding the wheat belt, the mining districts, the South West you know, the Goldfields, Central Western Australia. So we are very keen regardless of our electoral chances to have the best possible policies. In terms of my Western Australian team, I've got some very exciting talent, and again in five of the seats that we're targeting four of them women candidates. I mean you've got to love them in Stirling, don't you the Liberal Party - four women run for preselection and one man, you've got to know who the Liberal Party would pick don't you - another bloke.

JOURNALIST: Premier can you put a cost value on Chris Hemsworth’s video travelling the state and was it worth the price tag of his holiday?

MCGOWAN: Well it got a lot of attention Jess, I saw lots of photos in the West Australian, on Channel 7 and obviously he has one of the largest Instagram followers - followings in the entire world. So posting photos of Western Australia is exactly what we want. Celebrities like Mr Hemsworth and Matt Damon coming to Western Australia and showing off what we have is just terrific, and anyone who knows about tourism marketing these days knows that that's the sort of thing that works, and attracts attention and interest. So I'm very supportive and very pleased that Paul Papalia worked on that project and that we were able to secure it.
JOURNALIST: So how soon do you expect a return, when should tourism numbers to WA be increasing, becasue they've been stagnant.
MCGOWAN: No tourism numbers have been going up both interstate, intrastate and international and we've seen the first growth over the course of the last year in each of those. And obviously yesterday I announced another $12 million for international marketing, so we're doing everything we can to attract additional tourists to WA. You also saw over Christmas the direct flights from Tokyo to Perth, and Paul Papalia again worked very hard on that, so that's the sort of tourism improvements the industry has been crying out for.

JOURNALIST: When - is there a deadline? Would you expect to see vast improvement in 12 months, 24 months, before the state election?

MCGOWAN: We're always fighting for additional tourists but I just want to repeat, interstate, intrastate and international tourism numbers are growing, and they're growing under our government while they were going down under the last Liberal Government.
SHORTEN: I do see the irony, we did bring some of our Federal MPs across so you know we're doing our bit for Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: Are you spending money here?

SHORTEN: Yeah, sure we are.

JOURNALIST: Premier one of your members floated the idea of lowering the blood alcohol limit for drivers from 0.05 to zero, a flat zero. Is that discussion - is it time to have that discussion yet?
MCGOWAN: Look, we don't have any plans to do that. I just, sorry I only heard about it just before - I was out last night. We don't have any plans to do that. The majority of West Australians do the right thing, but I don't object to a community discussion around it. If people want to discuss it and talk about whether or not it's the right thing to do, I have no objection.

JOURNALIST: The limit at the moment, do you see it as effective and safe?

MCGOWAN: Well it's the national standard, so 0.05 is the national standard and it obviously has improved safety enormously since I was a kid ,when we used to drive around literally drinking whilst they were driving. There were no RBT's or anything of that nature out there. So obviously this initiative which has been in place now for decades across Australia has worked effectively, and saved lives on the road. But I don't object to a statewide debate or a national debate on these sorts of things. If it's raised in parliament that's what parliament is for, but we don't have any plans to do it at this point in time.

JOURNALIST: It's going to be the up to the State Government (inaudible)

MCGOWAN: Well the Commonwealth - sorry the Federal Opposition has committed $23 million which is around half the cost and then they'd seek funding from universities, from the private sector and potentially from the State Government. Now obviously the mining sector is very successful in Western Australia and so are the universities, so we'd seek to leverage money out of them for a contribution towards it. I'm very keen to work cooperatively with both the universities and the mining sector on these sorts of project.
JOURNALIST: Is there any double up? Would it cancel out the future batteries then that you are trying to get funding for?

MCGOWAN: No different things, different things. So the Co-operative Research Centre we put in $6.5 million towards that and that's specifically for lithium and to try and get us along the production phase towards batteries. Future mining Centre, bearing in mind we're the biggest mining and the most successful mining profits in the world, is about all our minerals.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten the Prime Minister has condemned comments by Michael Daley in a video that surfaced online. What do you make of the comments, and will you do the same?

SHORTEN: Well first of all there's a state election on Saturday, and Mr Daley has himself dealt with this matter and he's apologised for the remarks. What I do actually see is an important test for our current Prime Minister is this issue of how to treat extreme right wing parties in Australia. I agree with what the Prime Minister said on one of his outings this week where he said there's too much tribalism in Australia and we've got to be more sensible or moderate. That's why I then said that under me, the Labor Party will always put the Liberals and Nationals ahead of One Nation and Fraser Anning. Not because Mr Morrison or the government's policies are anything that I support. But at the some time, we've just, at some point in the political debate in Australia we've got to call time on the rubbish and the extremists. If the Liberal Party and the Labor Party, the two big parties of Australian politics, don't work together to say we have no tolerance for racism, no tolerance for extremism, then the extremists can always play us off against each other. We've got to form a united front against the hate merchants, the extremists, the political parties who seek to divide this country, who seek to enable majorities to pick on minorities. This is not the Australian way. For too long people have been too quiet on this and so I say again today - this is a test of Mr Morrison's leadership. I, who will never vote for the Liberals or Nationals, still think that they are a better party and a more serious party on balance than the fringe dwellers of the extreme right. I ask Mr Morrison to do the same. Are you seriously saying that the extreme right wing views of One Nation and Fraser Anning, you would rather send your votes to them than the other mainstream party. The contest that, I say to Mr Morrison those fringe dwellers can never form a government, and I certainly hope they never do. But unless the two mainstream political movements of this country say enough is enough, time is up on the extremists then they will continue to percolate, they will keep crawling out of the swamp of hatred which all too often some of their policies live in.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Mr McGowan can I ask you both would you support greater regulation of social media such as Facebook and Twitter, to deal with the promotion of hate speech and political extremist messages?

SHORTEN: Well I do think this is an overdue debate. Just like we need to actually shut the door on the extremists, on those that would divide our society, we now have to have the overdue conversation about the massive power that the technology leviathans exert in Australia. Love you or hate you in the current media and the traditional media, you know, you have to think about what you publish before you publish it as a general rule. And the point of that is that you are accountable to community standards. There are laws. But these big media platforms the Google's, Facebook, the stuff goes up, the hate goes out and then after that, then maybe they'll take it down. You know there's a very strong story today in the West Australian showing that Facebook was still putting material out. It has got to stop. Do you really think that these social media giants who they know what your kids ate for breakfast, they know where you're booking your next holiday, they know what your favourite you know, shopping lists are. Do you really think they can't do more to stop the digital hitmen and the trolls of the underbelly of social media from carrying out their business. So I'm going to meet with the social media companies and they have to explain what are they going to do better. The status quo is unacceptable. I've also said that we need to be better at recording hate crimes in this country. It is disturbing to discover that our own police agencies have different ways of recording hate crimes. Let me illustrate what I mean. You've got a young woman in a hijab, she gets punched, that's definitely assault, is it a hate crime? Possibly. If you've got a young gay man who's out one night and he gets set upon. If you've got a synagogue which gets vandalized with filthy Nazi rhetoric and abuse, you know, is that malicious property damage or is that a hate crime? So I think we've got to be better reporting it. I think these are important initiatives along with telling the extremists we're not going to work with you.

MCGOWAN: Oh look it's likely a Federal matter because the regulation of telecommunications is largely a Federal matter. But I must say, if there was a Federal move to try to regulate hate speech or some of the shocking stuff you see on social media I'd be supporting it. You know, we all hear all the time about young people who commit suicide because of some of the stuff they see online about themselves and some of the bullying that goes on. This has gone on long enough, and as the dad of three young kids, that's one of the things you worry about, and doing something strong in relation to this sort of activity and conduct I think, is something that every person should support.

JOURNALIST: Premier, have you formally asked [inaudible] and if they refuse to go, what will you do?

MCGOWAN: Well we're going to close Wittenoom. This has gone on long enough. We saw images recently of tourists going in there and basically playing in the deadly blue dust. And so it's been an issue that this state has confronted now for decades, and my government is going to make sure that we end this. Now, obviously it will be a process to work with the three residents that are there. We have money set aside to buy the properties and we will attempt to work constructively with them. It may take some time to resolve the issues but I think we should all agree, the fact that people are risking their lives and potentially killing themselves or their children when they go in there, that needs to stop.

JOURNALIST: So how will you stop people going in there, tourists or others?

MCGOWAN: Well you close the town and then you put in place - you close the roads, you do all that sort of thing. Now the advice I have is that because the township is still there and the roads are still there and there is even anecdotal evidence that some of the residents might be inviting people in there, that once all that stops then the people visiting the site will end as well. Now it might take some time. But seriously, the idea that people would go in there in the deadly blue dust and walk around in it and play around in it is just wrong and we need to take steps to end it.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
MCGOWAN: All those sorts of things, they're the sorts of things we will work on. But obviously ending the township where you have permanent residents, who may be inviting others into the township is a big step along the way to ending this dangerous site that can end people's lives.

SHORTEN: Listen I was just going to say, you've been very generous with your questions and very patient with our answers but all good things feel like they come to an end. So see you all a bit later.
MCGOWAN: Thank you.
TIM WATTS, FEDERAL MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND: Good afternoon. My name is Tim Watts, I'm the federal Member for Gellibrand in Melbourne's west. I'm joined here today by Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition, and Chloe Shorten. We're here at the Australian Islamic cCentre in Newport for National Open Mosque Day. Today we've seen thousands of residents of Melbourne's west flocking through the doors of this icon of Melbourne's west - an internationall- renowned architectural wonder, designed by one of Australia's great architects, Glenn Murcutt. It's an incredible building for a really important event. I was talking to one of the elderly gentleman inside the mosque just now and expressing my solidarity and sadness and shock at the atrocity that was committed in Christchurch, and he said to me, everything happens for a reason. What matters now the most is how we respond to this event. So I’ll was really pleased that Bill Shorten and Chloe came down here today to provide leadership about that response, about how we respond to the atrocity in Christchurch. On that note, I'll hand over to Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition.

BILL SHORTEN, THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Tim Watts, local Member for Gellibrand. The reverberations of the massacre in Christchurch are still ricocheting around the world. But I think quite keenly in Australia. Words I never thought I'd utter, "an Australian terrorist." An Australian terrorist who has gone to New Zealand and committed unspeakable evil, in particular singling out New Zealanders of the Muslim faith. But this event hasn't happened in isolation. Whilst it is without a doubt the single most shocking atrocity that I'm aware of in the western world towards people of the Muslim faith, there are many Muslim Australians who are feeling less secure than they were before Friday. So that is why, not just myself and Chloe, but literally tens of thousands of Australians are visiting mosques this weekend - people who have never set foot in a mosque before, just to express support. This isn't about religion, it's about humanity. It isn't about an evil act, it's also about an act of hope. I couldn't be prouder of standing in that mosque with so many people, not just Australians of Muslim faith, but Australians of all faiths, and indeed, none. What we see here today, when you look at the sea of faces from all backgrounds, is you actually see the best of Australia, as opposed to what we saw on Friday which is arguably the worst of Australia. I just want to say to all Australians, not just Australian Muslims, a nation can make a choice. It can respond to a shocking act of evil like this in one of two ways. We can retreat, back into our own tribes. We can retreat behind our own walls, our own faith. We can decide that we will just live our lives with greater fear, greater hate, greater suspicion of people who are different. Or we can make another choice. We can choose to confront fear with hope, to confront hate with love, to embrace - you can be proud of your own faith whatever it is, you can be proud of your own culture whatever it is - but you should use that as a bridge to understand others, to be positive about the collective of Australian humanity. I say to those who perpetuate extreme right wing hatred, just as I would say to extremists of all persuasions. I say to you this. You, by your hate speech, have created a swamp land of hatred, through your ideology of hatred. You, who want to practice in the name of free speech, hate speech, you who hide behind liberty to practice evil - well you have created this swamp of hate. You cannot disown what crawls out of your swamp. So I say to those extreme right politicians in Australia, those keyboard warriors who hide behind the Internet - you can't hide. You can't disown your stupidity, your ignorance, your foolishness, your hatred, your racism, your intolerance, your un-Australian attitude, and just hide behind hate speech. The families are still grieving in Christchurch. I cannot imagine the pain, and when you hear the stories of the people in Christchurch, the people who were gunned down at worship - a particularly vulnerable posture. Surgeons, doctors, fathers, kids - just people going about their day. When you hear about that story of one last victim who greeted his attacker with those words, "hello brother" . This is not who we are. Nations make choices. We've got to learn the lessons. I say to the social media giants, you have a commercial dynamic that you sell as liberty. But there is no liberty to hate. There is no liberty to practice hate speech. I say to those big social media giants, you cannot be distant, an island away from the conduct of your platforms. If a newspaper wrote some of the stuff that you allow on your media platforms, they'd be in court. If individuals at a cafe or a pub spoke in the way that you let people speak online, there'd be a call to the police. I just say, we've all got to learn the lessons from this. We've got to work together to make sure this can't happen again. But this scene today, which I was privileged to be here, when I witnessed ordinary Australians of all faiths backing each other up, saying this is not who we are. It was a privilege for Chloe and I to be here today, and as Leader of the Labor Party we will help learn the lessons to prevent this evil ever happening again. Happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of Fraser Anning's egging yesterday?

SHORTEN: Listen, the young man who egged him, that was a mug thing to do. You don't get your message out by coming up and crunching an egg on someone. That's just stupid. But when I also saw – so I've got no time for that, doesn't matter what rubbish that the politician was spouting, you don't want to give this foolish politician, this hurtful politician, any sense of the moral high ground, because he has none. But when I also saw the footage, some of those right wing extremist thugs, how many tough extreme right wingers does it take to wrestle with a 17 year old boy? Clearly too many - it's just wrong. So the police will have to do what they've got to do, and in a democracy I'm not going to interfere with what the police do.

JOURNALIST (ON PHONE): Hi Bill, how are you going?

SHORTEN: Good Fi.

JOURNALIST: I've got two questions - two topics to cover (inaudible).

SHORTEN: I'll do the non-Christchurch questions in a moment. Did you have any on that?

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

SHORTEN: Okay, just on just on Milo Yiannopoulos. You've got to ask the Government, the department said don't let this character in and the Government Ministers overruled the department. Now they've changed their mind after Christchurch. What is it that Milo Yiannopoulos has said after Christchurch that he wasn't saying before Christchurch? He shouldn't have been allowed in, you should've listened to the department, you've got to the right answer now, but it shouldn't take the events in New Zealand for the Government to get the answer right Let's prevent hate speech. People are entitled to freedom of speech, but they're not entitled to oppress the liberty of others. These extremists perpetuate hate. Not all extreme right wing hate speech ends in extreme violence, but all extreme right wing violence starts in extreme right wing hate speech. He should never have been granted the visa. I'm glad they've overruled it now. In terms of your question on Medicare, I'm pleased if the Government's putting some money back in, but they took $3 billion out of Medicare through their freeze on patient rebates. They've taken $2.8 billion in cuts to hospitals, $360 million in cutting preventative programs. So it's a drop in the bucket. It's five minutes to midnight and I think it's too little too late. Thanks Fi.

JOURNALIST: Thank you.

JOURNALIST: In terms of Facebook, what responsibility do you think social media giants like that have to stop broadcasting material like this?

SHORTEN: Social media and the Internet's a fantastic development. It allows us to be exposed to ideas, to connect, to break down isolation. It's a fantastic development. But the big media platforms do have an obligation to, I think, better monitor and prevent hate speech. The way that the big media platforms sell themselves to their customers, is they say to their customers who they want to buy advertising on Facebook and whatever else, they say, we know everything about the users of Facebook , we can tell you everything, you can geo-target and you can market. Their whole business model is to tell their customers that they know everything about their social media users. Well if that's your business model, fair enough, but you can't go missing and not know what they're saying when it comes to hate speech. Why is it that when it comes to making a dollar the big social media giants know everything about the users of social media, when it comes to detecting and preventing and discouraging hate speech, then they become Pontius Pilate and wash their hands of the whole affair. It's not good enough. We've got to work together with them. They have improved their reporting to police. But you can't have a commercial dynamic trading on liberty and then go missing when hate speech perverts it into violence and worse as we've seen.

JOURNALIST: What part does the Government have to play in assisting someone like Facebook then?

SHORTEN: I think this is a collective exercise. This isn't a Liberal, Labor or partisan exercise. It's been two days since Christchurch but - and there's families, people still fighting for their lives, New Zealand is trying to you know, just so much immediate grief and shock to get through - but we've got to learn the lessons. We keep saying we've got to learn the lessons through the radicalisation of people. Well, we're running out of time to learn the lessons. And how many more people have to die before we recognise that we've got to be a lot better? But let me be very clear. We wouldn't allow television or print media to put some of the filth and rubbish, and violence, and perversion which gets put out in social media, so we can't just have one standard for old technology and give a leave pass new technology. We've got to get the balance right. Social media is a marvellous tool, but it can't be used as a swamp in which wrongdoers can hide and crawl out to do even worse things.

JOURNALIST: And a further question on Fraser Anning please, do more politicians need to rethink the language they use in relation to refugees and migration?

SHORTEN: I think most politicians are not like Fraser Anning. Thank God. There's only a very few like him pop up. But I think the debate needs to be more respectful. And this really goes to that question of what sort of nation do we want to be. Do we want to be a nation who tells the majority to be scared of minorities? Do we want to be a country who says that we need to be nervous and scared of a few hundred people coming here? Do we want to be a nation which says that if someone worships a different God, has a different sexual identity, has a different political view, that somehow we've got to be scared and nervous? We shouldn't be. Australia is a great country. This man, Brenton Tarrant, does not represent Australia but he comes from us. We should be a country who needs to be more confident in ourselves. Our strength is our diversity. Our strength is that people come here from 100 different lands, they can have whatever views they have so long as they fit in with adhering to our laws and being good people. As I said in the mosque, what makes a good Australian doesn't depend on how many generations have been here, how much money they have in the bank, your gender, your religion. What makes a good Australian is the way you treat your fellow Australians. Today we're seeing, I think, a little microcosm, a humble microcosm, of the best of Australia. I got a chance to speak and say the things which I know people are feeling. That's a privileged position. But there's thousands of people who don't give a speech in front of the television, who don't echo the big debates, but they feel it in their hearts. And every individual person who's come here today to say to Muslim Australians that we're standing alongside you, that's very optimistic, very optimistic. Thanks everybody.
SUBJECT: Christchurch mosque attack.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Australians and New Zealanders are brothers and sisters. So today, we mourn for our New Zealand brothers and sisters. We feel their pain. We grieve with them. There is so much that we still don't know about this senseless, evil act of murder. But it is chilling in its callous preparation, it is horrifying in the scale of death and injury. This was an attack on a mosque. It's a form of a church, it could have been a synagogue. This is an attack on worshippers practising their faith innocently. An attack on any religion is an affront on all religions. It is an affront on our common humanity. Today, as we try and make sense of this, I particularly feel for the Islamic Australian community who must be feeling very, very, very concerned and upset. I also feel for all the parents who are going to try and explain this to our children tonight. But what we need to do in explaining this, is heed the wise counsel of the New Zealand Police Force: do not watch the footage, that is what the bad people want us to do. Do not share the footage, that is what the bad people have sought us to do. Do not let this into our lives. This is not normal, do not make this violence normal. Evil is never normal, evil is never part of daily life. And we must do everything we can to unite and prevent this happening again.

TIM WATTS, MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND: Good morning. My name's Tim Watts I'm the Federal Member for Gellibrand in Melbourne's west. I'm really pleased to be here at Braybrook today with Labor's candidate for the new federal electorate of Fraser, Daniel Mulino and the leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten. We've been here today taking a tour of this modern facility, adapting to the changing global economy and talking to the Australian workers on the floor here who are adapting to that change too. I was struck talking to these workers though that just up the road from this site, a couple of kilometres away is the old Sunshine Harvester factory. That sunshine Harvester factory was a site of one of the really big industrial relations decisions in Australian history. It was a decision that said that in Australia you don't just pay workers as little as you can get away with. It was a decision that defined the kind of nation that Australia became. It set up Australia as the working man's paradise in the first half of the 20th century. The upcoming federal election will be a referendum on wages. It will be one of those decisions that shapes the kind of country that Australia is. On the one hand you have the Morrison government who just in recent weeks owned up to deliberately pursuing a strategy to keep Australian workers’ wages down in Australia. A government with a record of years of voting against penalty rates for Australian workers, voting to cut penalty rates for Australian workers. On the other hand, you've got the Shorten Labor Opposition who is committed to wages growth for Australian workers, who's outlined policies to push wages up for Australian workers. We understand that in Australia everything is going up except for wages. It needs to change and we need a change of government to do it. That's why I'm really proud that Bill Shorten is coming here today to talk about wages for Australian workers in Melbourne's west. Thanks Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Tim, and it's great to be doing an event in my own electorate of Maribyrnong. I'm here of course  with my neighbouring MP, Tim Watts and exciting new federal Labor candidate for the seat of Fraser in Melbourne's west Daniel Mulino. This week the ABS has revealed that record numbers of Australian wage earners have to now have a second job just to make ends meet. The ABS has dramatically revealed this week, that one million Australian wage earners now have to have a second job just to make ends meet. How did it come to be, that after record corporate profits in the last few years, from 2016, major Australian corporations and Australian corporations recorded 45 per cent corporate profits, wages are only increasing over that time by a total of 8 per cent across the last four years. How is it that under this current government we now have the problem of wages stagnation. Everywhere I go in Australia from the top end of Tasmania from Western Australia right through to Sydney, wherever I go people say to me -Bill everything is going up except our wages. This is a problem. We now have wages stagnation and it's a problem for everybody. When millions of Australian wage earners are experiencing record low wage growth then everybody suffers. When millions of Australians literally have to get a second job just to make ends meet then the economy is not working in the interests of everyday Australians. And when millions of Australians are experiencing low wages growth then everybody suffers. Sixty per cent of the Australian economy is consumption. That means that what people spend is fundamental as an engine room in the Australian. But when people are experiencing, when millions of wage earners, are experiencing little or no wages growth then what happens is the entire economy’s confidence contracts. Mr Morrison, not only has done nothing about wages, but he's proud that he's done nothing about wages. Mr Morrison is long overdue to outline to Australians his wages policy, not a policy on something else but a wages policy. Labor is united in our focus that everything is going up except wages. We know that we can't do everything. We know that whatever we do is got to balance against the needs of right across the economy. But we need to get something done. I acknowledge that Australian households are doing it tough. The people I met in the aisles here, they've got good jobs here and we congratulate the company and the workforce for what they're doing. But a lot of people are finding it hard to make ends meet, as energy prices are up, out-of-pocket costs to see the doctor up, and of course we've got wages stagnation. Mr Morrison voted eight times to cut penalty rates . Eight occasions Mr Morrison's had the opportunity to support restoring people's penalty rates which were arbitrarily cut by the Fair Work Commission. Mr Morrison has no wages plan for Australians. The Liberals are only interested in looking after their mates at the top end of town. Only Labor has a policy to make sure that we get wages moving again, for restoring penalty rates, for clamping down on dodgy labour hire through protecting subcontractors from exploitative practices. We are determined to roll up our sleeves and help millions of Australian wage earners do a little better than they're doing now. Mr Morrison, he has no plan for millions of Australian wage earners. He's got a plan for bigger banks not better wages. We're happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Yes, so Mr Shorten given your stated support for a living wage does Labor support the ACTU claim for a $43 a week increase in the minimum wage?

SHORTEN: Labor will outline more of our approach on the minimum wage in coming days. We're not committing to a particular number and whilst the unions are entitled to make a claim they see fit, that's not our position. But where we have a common position is that the minimum wage should be higher than what it is now, and what we're going to do to improve people's wages is through a raft of practical and real measures. We want to restore the penalty rates which were arbitrarily cut. We want to make sure that labour hire workers who work alongside in-house workers of companies and businesses are paid the same rate of pay. We want to make sure that subcontractors who are the backbone of the Australian economy don't get ripped off by dodgy directors. We want to make sure that temporary visa workers in Australia are not being exploited. We  want to stop wages theft occurring across businesses where workers are being systematically ripped off and we want to make sure that Australian women when they go to work, get paid the same as Australian men. This is measures for our wages policy and we'll have more to say about other aspects of our wages policy as we get closer to an election.

JOURNALIST: Can you explain in simple terms how wages would be higher under Labor?

SHORTEN: Penalty rates would be restored. Pay equity cases in feminised industries, we'll make sure that women get a better deal equivalent to their male counterparts in other industries. We'll make sure that labour hire workers when they work alongside in-house workers in the media, in the airline industry, in warehousing, in retail, get paid the same as the people they work alongside who are directly employed by the company. What we'll also do is we’ll look after subcontractors. There's too much corporate insolvency in Australia where company directors are paid money to do work, they have promised the subcontractor who does the work for them that they'll get reimbursed - but what happens is the company director leaves town, doesn't pay the debts owed to the subcontractor. So they are all practical measures to make sure that we can lift wages. Now I notice Mr Morrison saying that somehow if you lift the wages of people that's an economic disaster. When is it ever a good time for a Liberal to support a wage rise? For the last four years we've seen corporate profits go up 45 per cent, wages only move by eight per cent over the last four years. Why is that Mr Morrison isn't outraged by that. Why do Liberals worry about what a retail worker or a bank worker or a hospital worker get, you know they worry about that, about you know, some extra dollars each week for them. But you never hear them out marching in the streets complaining about the wages at the top end of town. In Australia we want corporations to be profitable, we want business to do well. But we've always had a view in Australia since the foundation of our nation that if you do a fair day's work you get a fair day's pay. That's becoming less and less real. In the total wealth created in this country we're seeing an increasing share go to corporate profits and less to the wage earners, the millions of wage earners who create it. Mr Morrison likes to pretend that somehow if you look after millions of wage earners that's bad for the nation. He doesn't get the basic economics of it. When millions of Australian wage earners are getting you know, reasonable and modest increases in their pay. That means they have more money to spend. This last Christmas we've seen very disappointing retail numbers. That's because Australians are spending more of their household savings they're relying more on the credit card and they're not getting reasonable wage rises. Under the Liberals some people do very well, the big end of town. The problem is that for millions of Australian wage earners they haven't been sharing in the fairness. There's nothing wrong for Australian economic life to see millions of wage earners get a fair go.

JOURNALIST: You said you would change legislation to set the minimum wage, would that legislation enable you to direct the Fair Work Commission?

SHORTEN: Oh no we want, the way wages, the way that the award wages get set is that the independent umpire sets them.  But what happens is that the independent umpire has guidelines in their principals they apply to look at the evidence. It's completely standard business for national governments to from time to time update the guidelines that we give to the independent umpire. Again, why is this government so scared of looking after millions of Australian wage earners? You know they've been hot to trot to give an $80 billion tax cut to corporate Australia but you don't see them working up a sweat about the millions of Australian wage earners who've had little or no pay rises over the last few years. The problem in Australia is we have low wages growth which is leading to a decline in economic confidence. The problem in Australia is that everything is going up except your wages. Do you know in the last five and a half years since the current bunch have been in power the average out of pocket cost to go and see a GP has gone up 25 per cent. The average out of pocket cost to see a specialist has gone up 40 per cent, opening your energy bills is almost like a feat of lion taming, you don't know what's going to spring out of it in the way of an increased price. Yet this Government's got no policy to decrease their energy costs so the cost of living is going up. Ask all the parents who had to do the return to school costs at the beginning of this year. Ask all the parents who are getting increasing bills from their schools including government schools about the basics. Ask any pensioner trying to work out their medical costs or get their prescription medication. Why is Mr Morrison missing in action on wage stagnation. Why does Mr Morrison not only do nothing about lifting wages but he's proud of the fact he's doing nothing. Why did he vote eight times to stop Labor restoring people's penalty rates?

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Pardon?

JOURNALIST: Does the Fair Work Commission remain the independent umpire if the guidelines have been tweaked by the Coalition Government?

SHORTEN: The Fair Work Commission is subject to the legislation of the Parliament, the Parliament is sovereign and I think we've had a very good system in Australia which has worked better than not over previous decades. Australia was very proud of making sure that working people in this country got a fair go. I mean, we don't want to go down the American path where everyone's on day-hire. Where you've got to hope that your health insurance is paid by the employer otherwise you go without proper health care. We've got a good safety net in this country but what's happening is that it's under more and more pressure. Cost of living is a real issue. Everyone promised, the Liberals promised Australia and the Nationals, they said if corporations do well they will generously share the benefits of their extra profits with the workers of Australia. What they said is the reason why corporations should get an $80 billion corporate tax cut is not only will corporations make more profit but Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison promised Australians that when companies are making a lot more money, magic it's all going to be passed on to the workers in wage rises. Well that fairy tale didn't have a happy ending, that is not what's happened in Australia. What's happened is we've seen corporate profits go up. The exact Liberal experiment which promises millions of wage earners - corporations profits go up, everything will be alright, it will all trickle down to you in the form of better wages. That hasn't happened. We can't just leave it to the generosity of the top end of town to look after millions of wage earners can we.

JOURNALIST: So you are satisfied with the capacity of Fair Work to set wage rises?

SHORTEN: Yes, I am satisfied in the general they are. You know once every 20 years they get it wrong, they got the penalty rates decision wrong, 25 years ago they didn't want to introduce superannuation in awards and a Labor Government had to legislate to create superannuation. But I think having an independent process based upon evidence is the way to go. As a general rule it has served Australian workplaces and flexibility and productivity very well but we have a problem in Australia at the moment. Corporate profits going up and up and up. The price of the cost of living is going up and up, health costs, energy costs but wages - wages haven't been invited to that party, they are stagnating at the moment.

JOURNALIST: So back to changing those guidelines then what would that like? Would the Fair Work Commission still retain that independence?

SHORTEN: Absolutely.

JOURNALIST: But how, what would it look like, how would you change it?

SHORTEN: The Fair Work Commission is a creature of legislation. So parliament's pass laws, we want an independent umpire but can we go back to what the real issue is here. This government has never seen a wage rise they support for millions of Australians. You know, they'll do - they'll talk about anything else, they'll promise practically anything else, but they don't have a wages policy. So what we say very clearly is that everything is going up in Australia except people's wages.  We acknowledge that's real, we can't fix every problem but we can and we should do something about wages. That's why we're going to reverse the penalty rate cuts. That's why we're going to crack down on dodgy labour hire and some of the other measures that we've discussed to some of your previous questions.

JOURNALIST: Just on energy, Labor has pledged an economy-wide 45 per cent emissions cut, but cuts are easier to make in energy. Will you rule out a higher emissions target on energy than 45 per cent to allow lower targets in transport and agriculture?

SHORTEN: We will have more to say about our climate policy the closer we get to an election. Certainly, what we have already said is that we want to see 50 per cent of our energy mix by 2030 coming from renewables. I make no apologies for backing a new technology over the old technology, I make no apologies for saying that we should be much better at utilising solar power and wind power as part of our energy mix, there will be fossil fuels in our energy mix going forward and they will be part of our exports going forward. But Australia can't live in the past. We can't keep telling everyone that - what this Government's essentially trying to do is tell people that you don't have to change. But the Australian people want to see action on climate change. Did you know that two million Australian households already have solar panels? What we want to do is expand the role of batteries to store that energy. So we'll have more to say about our emissions policy as we go forward, closer to the election.

JOURNALIST: But do you rule out a 45 per cent target for transport and agriculture?

SHORTEN: Well I did say that we'll have more to say about our energy policy going forward. And certainly, I think the Government's been in power for now the best part of six years. Did you know they're on their 12th energy policy? The Government needs to be upfront with the Australian people before the election. Are they going to invest in new coal fired power technology? Are they going to invest in new coal fired power plants? So we will talk more about our climate policy, there's still another 65 days to the election- who's counting? - but we certainly will have more to say.

JOURNALIST: The workers here at Woolies are on an EBA not the minimum wage. What would you do to boost their wages?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, whilst they're on the EBA, the EBA for the penalty rates is drawn from the award, so the award is still relevant. So our reversal of penalty rate cuts will lead to a pay rise for workers. Beyond that, I'll tell you what else we’ll do for these workers; when they go and see the doctor, they'll get a bigger patient rebate. When they go to see their energy bills in the future, they'll have a better chance to have lower energy bills because we will tackle their energy costs through more renewable energy. When they do their tax at tax time, they're going to get a bigger better tax cut of $928 dollars each year. They're solid measures: bigger better tax cuts for the workers here, we will reverse their penalty rates cut because actually, the EBA here does use the award as its basis, but we will also help get down their cost of living. Also, because we going properly fund schools and hospitals, their cost of living going to be a lot cheaper when it comes to education. If some of these workers want to go to TAFE, we're going to pay their upfront fees. If some of them want to go to university, there'll be more university places available. So I think when you look at it, we're the party of working and middle class Australia. We're also going to make it easier to get to work by investing in public transport in Melbourne. Really, the list goes on and on, the things we're going to do for working and middle class wage earners in this country.

JOURNALIST: Just back on energy, I've asked you this before and you said you were consulting. Is there any update on if Labor does win the election, will it be using carbon credits from Kyoto Protocol?

SHORTEN: Kyoto carry-over credits? No, my answer hasn't changed from the last time. But again, fair enough people want to know about climate policy. We're working on that. We'll have plenty to say before the election. Climate policy in this country though, shouldn't be the deal breaker it is for the Government that it is. Really, they got rid of Mr Turnbull because he wanted to have a bipartisan approach on climate policy. We're committed to working that through.

JOURNALIST: Any time frame on that?

SHORTEN: Well before the next election.

JOURNALIST: It is rapidly approaching.

SHORTEN: Yes, I do - like you, I wish the Government would call the election.

JOURNALIST: Just finally, do you agree with Michael Daley saying that students should be allowed to skip school for those climate change rallies?

SHORTEN: Listen, kids are allowed to have an opinion. In an ideal world, they would protest after school hours or on weekends. But it's a bit rich of the Government to lecture school kids for going on strike about climate. This Government's been on strike about climate policy for the last five and a half years. They really are not the best role models for the kids on climate policy, are they? Last two or three questions.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, I just wanted to ask you about children caught up in the Syria -

SHORTEN: Oh yes, the foreign fighters.

JOURNALIST:  And if their parents are foreign fighters. What do you think should happen to them should? Shouldn't they be allowed back in Australia?

SHORTEN: I feel for the kids. I don't have the same sympathy for the parents who've taken them into a war-zone to fight in a war zone, especially to fight on the ISIS side. Listen, I do feel for the kids and the extended family. We will work with the Government on this. But people who go overseas to fight in foreign wars, especially but not just limited to that ISIS cause, they get no sympathy from me. But I think the kids are in a different boat, that's really not easy is it?

JOURNALIST: So do you think the children should be allowed to return to Australia?

SHORTEN: Well, we've got to work through. Do you separate kids from their parents? Who's going to look after them? I think the parents though shouldn't use the kids to rationalise. They've gone over there for whatever crazy reason. Now it hasn't worked out the way they thought. And then they want to come back? You don't just get that, you don't - you make your own bed, you've got to lie in it. But I do get that because they've got kids, those kids might have grandparents or aunts and uncles. It is complicated.  We will work with the Government. I don't think it's an issue of political point scoring between me and the Government. But I have no sympathy for the parents. Parents who take their kids to war zones, get no sympathy. What are they thinking? I don't care what their logic is, putting your kids into that sort of situation, just selfish and wrong.

JOURNALIST: The Federal Government's locked away $3 billion dollars in funding for the east-west link. If you win government, what would you like to see done with that money and have you spoken to Dan Andrews about it?

SHORTEN: Listen, this Government has locked away money for a road project which isn't going to happen in the foreseeable future according to the Andrews Government. So I just think that's the ultimate in you know, sort of pettiness. If the Federal Government can't convince Daniel Andrews to do it, Daniel Andrews has been to an election and said he wasn't going to do it. Why don't the Federal Government climb down off their high horse and free up some infrastructure money for Victorians and Melburnians in the way which has been voted on at the state election. I think the Metro rail projects are fantastic. I'm pleased that we're doing an airport link - that's long overdue. But I think the more that we can do to give public transport options to road users in Melbourne, the better Melbourne will be. Melbourne's getting too congested but one of the reasons it's congested is because we've got a Federal Government fighting, you know, the 2014 state election yet again with Dan Andrews. The federal Liberals have got to get over themselves and get onside with Victorians. Did you know that the federal Liberals spend about 10 cents in every dollar nationally on infrastructure in Victoria? That's hopeless. They've got a very anti-Victoria mindset.

JOURNALIST: Do they throw the $3 billion to the Metro Tunnel?

SHORTEN: Well, we'll talk with Dan Andrews about the best use of that. If I become Prime Minister of Australia, I'm not going to try and score points off another level of government. What we want is more cooperation - cooperation in workplace relations, cooperation in health care, cooperation in school funding, cooperation on climate change and cooperation in transport. Very last?

JOURNALIST: Jason O'Mara, the head of the CFMMEU in Canberra has had his house shot at while he and his family was inside. What -

SHORTEN: Yeah listen, I've heard about that. I deplore any violence. Doesn't matter if it's an illegality, in the workplace, in the home or indeed, I deplore illegality in corporate suites and the banks. So I don't know any more about it. The police investigating.

JOURNALIST: Just quickly, will you be attending the Dick Pratt funding dinner?

SHORTEN: The Democrat? Sorry.

JOURNALIST: Dick Pratt -

SHORTEN: I go to heaps of fundraising, it is an occupational hazard of my job. Thanks.

ALICIA PAYNE, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CANBERRA: Good morning, my name is Alicia Payne and I'm Labor's candidate for the new federal seat of Canberra. I'm thrilled this morning to join with Chief Minister Andrew Barr and Transport Minister Meegan Fitzharris to welcome our Leader Bill Shorten to Canberra this morning to make this really exciting announcement about our Light Rail project. This is certainly one of the most exciting projects that I've seen in my lifetime in Canberra and it's amazing to see Federal Labor get behind that in such a great way today. This is great for local jobs and it shows how much Federal Labor under a Shorten Labor Government will take pride in our nation's capital and support this project and ACT Labor's vision for our city. And I'll hand over to Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Alicia and good morning everybody. Fantastic to be out and about in Canberra proper with Chief Minister Andrew Barr and our exciting new candidate Alicia Payne. Federal Labor is pleased to announce that we will invest $200 million if elected, starting from our first budget, in Canberra's second stage Light Rail, which will see this marvellous tram line extended all the way to Woden. I'm not sure if people elsewhere in Australia realise but the Canberra region, the greater Canberra region, is home to half a million people. It's one of the fastest growing parts of Australia, and great cities have great public transport. Andrew Barr has shown real leadership in the stage one of the light rail project and I'm very pleased that Federal Labor can join in supporting the second stage - $200 million - and we'll make allocation for it in our first budget. It's already in stage one generated about 1,400 jobs and I think it'd be great if we can roll seamlessly from stage one into stage two. So all the construction workers, the subbies, all the machinery which is available doesn't get dissipated and then have to be reassembled at greater cost in the future. This is the way public infrastructure should be built in Australia - moving in well planned stages, keeping a pipeline of work for Australia's construction workforce and subbies, the backbone of Australia. I'd now like to invite Chief Minister Andrew Barr and of course his Transport Minister Meegan Fitzharris to say some further words then we're happy to talk about this exciting development for Canberra which will generate jobs, economic activity, and of course make a better contribution to the environment. Over to Andrew.

ANDREW BARR, CHIEF MINISTER OF THE ACT: Thank you very much Bill, and to Alicia and Meegan. This is a very significant day for Canberra, a very exciting announcement from Bill Shorten and Federal Labor in support of public transport in our city. But it’s, I think signifies a very clear direction from Federal Labor to work closely with state and territory governments to bust congestion in our fast growing cities. Here in Canberra we are experiencing very rapid levels of population growth. To those who don't go outside of Capital Hill that often, Canberra is not a bubble, it is a real city with real Australias who go about their daily lives just like everyone else. And this recognition from Federal Labor that Canberra is a city worthy of investment, particularly in a major public transport project, is most welcome. We've had a period over the last five and a half years where Canberra has largely been overlooked or ignored by the Federal Government. So today's announcement is a welcome investment in our city's growth and future, and it reflects an important Commonwealth responsibility that the second stage of Light Rail goes through the Parliamentary Triangle, goes through significant areas of national importance. Lots of Commonwealth public servants, lots of people who'll be working for the next Shorten Labor Government will be able to benefit from this public transport investment. From the ACT Government's perspective it gives us confidence to move into the next stage of project delivery. Just as important as the financial commitment is, it's also the signal it sends to us and to all of those working on the projects, that a Shorten Labor Government would be supportive, would assist us through the various planning stages including Parliamentary approval - both the House of Representatives and the Senate must approve this project. And so this is a very strong signal that that process will be supported, that we'd have an engaged Commonwealth Government who wants the project to be delivered, and that is a sharp point of difference between what Bill Shorten is offering today and what we have experienced over the last five and a half years. So we're very excited about the opportunity that this presents. We know this area is going to continue to grow in terms of both residents and those working. This initiative will be very important to ensure that Canberra remains one of the world's most liveable cities and that we don't go down the path of other Australian cities where congestion becomes a real problem and governments are having to catch up with those challenges - we can get ahead of that here in Canberra through this sort of public transport investment. It's fantastic to see, we're delighted today, and we look forward to working with Bill and his team to make this second stage of Light Rail a reality. As you see behind me, the first stage is nearing completion and we're delighted to be able to extend the project to the south of our city. And I invite Transport Minister Megan Fitzharris to say a few words now, Meegan.

MEEGAN FITZHARRIS, TRANSPORT MINISTER FOR THE ACT: Thank you Andrew, thank you very much to Bill and a special thank you to Alicia Payne our exciting candidate here for the new seat of Canberra. This is a great day. We very much welcome the significant contribution both in terms of the funding commitment of $200 million in the first budget but certainly seamless cooperation with a Federal Government led by Bill Shorten to actually get the approvals for this project through. This is the most significant part of Canberra's Light Rail network. To be able to have stage one of Light Rail from Gungahlin to the city, then reach over Lake Burley Griffin down to the southern part of Woden. Woden is one of Canberra's fastest growing town centres. The local ACT Labor Government has big plans for Woden, Light Rail is an important part of that. This contribution both in funding and support from the Federal Shorten Government is very welcome. And we know that a pipeline of infrastructure is important for all growing cities. We must invest in public transport infrastructure to future proof our cities for people's everyday business so they can get to and from work, school, university, mixing with friends and family without having to deal with what we see around the country and right here in Canberra, and that is growing congestion. It's also a great project for our environment, it does significantly help to tackle climate change, so we are thrilled to have this announcement today, we thank Alicia and Bill very much and we look forward to working with a Shorten Labor Government federally to get the approvals through for stage two of Canberra's Light Rail.

SHORTEN: Thanks Meegan, are there any questions on the Light Rail?

SHORTEN: Let's just - there's so many of you, it's great see you all, I've missed you. Perhaps if we start on my left and move around and we'll come back.

JOURNALIST: We haven't even seen a business case for stage two Light Rail yet. Why are you giving this money now?

SHORTEN: Because we're committed to making sure that Canberra gets a fair share of our expenditure. Half a million people in the greater Canberra/Queanbeyan region. I think it is appropriate that we plan for the future. Of course there's got to be a business case, but I think that the work which has already been done, combined with the business case which will come, I think it's important we make sure we create room in our budgets in the future. People in the greater Canberra region and Queanbeyan, they pay their taxes. They've got a right to see some of the reinvested in their region. That's what we're doing. Sorry, I’ll come back to you next.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, will you legislate to change the Fair Work Act to ensure that the minimum wage can be lifted?

SHORTEN: Well first of all let's talk about one of the biggest problems in Australia and then I'll come to the specific answer you’re seeking. Everything in Australia is going up except people's wages. We've seen, I read an article written by columnist Greg Jericho which showed in the journal he wrote in, that corporate profits since 2016 have gone up north to 40 per cent, but wages have gone up 8 per cent. In the last twelve months alone, when things are even going tough, corporate profits have gone up 9.8 per cent, but private sector wages haven't even hit two per cent. Something's not working in our wages system. It simply isn't fair nor sustainable for economic confidence in this country that an adult could work full time and be earning $18.93 per hour, the minimum wage before tax. We've got to create a wages system and a system in our workplaces which rewards productivity but doesn't leave adults in Australia working full time on a wage level which for many of them doesn't see them out of poverty. Now Labor's proposed a series of mechanisms whereby we increase the wages of the low paid. Let me just remind you of what we've already said. We want to restore the penalty rates which are arbitrarily cut in retail and hospitality. These awards cover north 700,000 people. Yet again, encouraged by the Liberals, employer groups are trying to extend the penalty rate cuts to other sectors of Australian industry. So we're gonna put a stop on that. We've also said that we wanted to crack down on dodgy labour hire companies and sham contracting. Nearly four million Australians working casualised, insecure, contract, labour hire work - now some of them choose that, no question, but for a lot of Australians they'd like more hours and more regularity in their pay. But they're engaged, they're caught in a race to the bottom. Another measure that we've already announced which will help subcontractors is that where there is a Commonwealth project we want, when we pay valuable important taxpayer money to principal contractors, we don't want the directors of those companies riding off into the sunset with of all the money and leaving the subbies unpaid. So we want to create a locked box, a system whereby if we pay money as the client, the principal contractor, the money which is due to go to the subcontractor stays there. We've also said we want to chase down and do more to help and close the gender pay gap. But going to your specific issue, the minimum wage in Australia should be a living wage. My colleagues and I, Brendan O'Connor, Chris Bowen and I will have more to say in coming weeks well before the election about some of our principles for converting a minimum wage into a living wage. But I could already put forward to you two propositions. One, we want to help the Fair Work Commission with the guidelines they use to set the minimum wage and we want to take into account all factors. Two, we start from the principle and who can argue with this, other than perhaps the government, if we don't want adults in Australia working full time trying to survive on $18.93 per hour before tax.
JOURNALIST: Just further on Eryk’s question and a related question. You say that you want to get a Fair Work Commission guidance on how they come about the minimum wage. Does that require legislation, legislative change? And secondly, I want to ask about your bigger, better tax cuts that you talked about yesterday. You say that you're going to deliver that for eight, nine million people. Is that on top of everything that Labor's already promised or is it something that we're going to hear in your Budget Reply?
SHORTEN: Well on the first one, there's a range of ways which governments can put the case to the Fair Work Commission. They can make submissions in the minimum wage case -
JOURNALIST: You've already done that -
SHORTEN: You're right, I'm giving your answer. First of all, you can make submissions and that's one thing which is definitely available a tool. Another tool or mechanism which is available is to change the legislation. We'll have more to say on this in coming weeks. I have to say though, please let me know how you go asking the current government about a wages policy. They are more lost than Burke and Wills when it comes to wages policy. They think a wages policy is cutting penalty rates and sending you know, hapless ministers out like Cormann and Reynolds, just boast that their economic architecture is low wages. Economic architecture of government should not be to deliver low wage outcomes. On your second question about our bigger, better tax cuts - I agree with you. We announced them in the last Budget Reply, we said that we believe that we should be focusing tax reform on providing, create a refunds to people who earn less than $120,000 a year. What happens if you earn $90,000 a year and some of you would know this, is that you spend nearly every dollar you get. What we've seen with low wages growth is we've seen a contraction in economic activity. People basically are dipping into household savings just to make ends meet. We've got a government it can't do anything about energy prices except complain about each other, the out-of-pocket costs of going to see a doctor, a GP, have gone up 25 per cent since this current crew got in. Out-of-pocket costs to go and see a specialist, 40 per cent so families are hit hard. So what we proposed last budget because we knew that wages and cost of living are an issue, even though this government's been asleep at the wheel. What we said is we would give people who earn up to $90,000 a year hundred a $928 tax refund. And that means that if you've got dad doing one job - earns $80,000 - $90,000, mum does another job full time, earns $70,000, it means under a Labor Government in our first term they'd get nearly $6000 back in tax refund. Because we want to govern in the interests of working people in this country, not the top end of town.

JOURNALIST: I was asking about new tax offsets -
SHORTEN: Hang on. Well we've got to see their Budget. Does anyone think this Budget is anything other than a propaganda document prepared at one minute to midnight by a government who is so busy killing each other that it's amazing they'll even turn up to the Budget? Does anyone in Australia - and you're seasoned political observers - do any of you seriously believe that this government is going to do anything in this Budget other than send a big SOS note out in a bottle saying to voters we're sorry for doing nothing for the last six years. We're sorry for having got it wrong in the 2014 Budget. We're sorry that we've rolled two Prime Ministers, that we've had 22 reshuffles, 12 energy policies, five defence ministers. What they're going to is dangle a little bit of propaganda, to hope that people will forget the chronic pathology of instability in their government.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten -

SHORTEN: - I'll come back to you -

JOURNALIST: Just further on the Fair Work Commission. Can you explain why you would trust the Fair Work Commission on minimum wage but not on penalty rates? And secondly, is there a link between the minimum wage and employment participation?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all we trust the Fair Work Commission but periodically they do get it wrong, and Hawke and Keating said they got it wrong when they made a decision, about when they rejected award based superannuation in the late 80s, which led to Keating legislating compulsory super. But it is infrequent, they've got a great track record as a general rule but what we've also got to do - and I do think they've got it wrong arbitrarily cutting penalty rates - what we have to do is give them the tools, give them the guidelines. You know, the minimum wage really hasn't been updated since the 80s' and I don't mean the increments I mean some of the principles. You know back in the mid-80s' the Internet hadn't been invented, water was free, yet mobile phones weren't used, time charging was still regarded as an anathema. We've had it - they didn't have this government in place where we've seen out-of-pocket costs go and see the doctor increase. Terrible cuts to our hospital system, they have been terrible, cuts to TAFE. So I do think that we need to refresh the guidelines and we'll have more to say about that.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten -

SHORTEN: Sorry, Speersy had a second question -

JOURNALIST: The link between the minimum wage and employment if it gets too high, does that drive up unemployment?

SHORTEN: I love this argument put aside by the bosses of Australia, the fat cats, the top end of town. They say that if we pay the poorest workers in Australia a bit more, that's out of control. But how is it that these executives are happy to take more and more in corporate profits.  This is the problem of Australia in 2019. The benefits of hard work are not being equally spread. I want to say to all the Australians who are watching the news and watching this broadcast right now, I say I get it. I get that the cost of sending your kids to school has gone up. I get that your energy bills have gone up. I get that you haven't had any wages movement. I get that energy bills are up. But what I also get is that corporate profits are up. Is it fair in this country that corporate profits under the Liberals can go up north of 40 per cent and wages go up by 8 per cent? That's not the deal, everyone should share in the benefits of creating wealth in this country. The Australian workers, the nurses, the aged care attendants, the teachers, the firies, the tram drivers, the camos behind the cameras here today all contribute but somewhere along the line we've got caught up in this conservative trickle-down economics which says that you can pay the bosses global wages but you've got to pay the workers the lowest possible. I don't accept that a living wage causes unemployment. I don't accept that paying people more than poverty wages actually cripples the economy. On the contrary, what we've seen is that when the market is broken, when we see the wages system not delivering that's actually a bigger harm for the economy. No lesser person than the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Phillip Lowe, you can't call him a lefty, he's just a very straight public servant doing his job. He has said the single biggest social and economic problem in Australia at the moment is low wages growth. I won't turn my back on the workers of Australia it's why the Labor Party was formed and that way it will help small business, it will help the farmers, it will get the income moving, everything is better.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull says the Liberals have a problem with women and cultural issues as well. How much is he helping you right now?

SHORTEN: I think rather than shoot the messenger let's deal with the message. Everybody knows the Liberal Party has a problem with women. We've seen it, and Malcolm Turnbull's just belled the cat yet again. But I actually think the Australian people don't want to hear what I think about the Liberal Party. I think you and the Liberal Party are doing a perfectly good job, and the National Party, covering their chronic instability, their inability to work together. Now what I want to say to Australian people today is I understand that the government's a mess but you can work that out yourself, you don't need me to tell you. What the people of Australia want to hear from me is what are we going to do about it? Well we are stable, I think even our harshest critics say that for the last 2000 days we've conducted ourselves on good days and bad days with a degree of stability. Even some of you would say that. We are also united and I've got a talented team, my team are well known and most of them have been in the same job for five years. Chances are they know what they're doing by now and they've been working very hard on the policies. You can't say that about the current government. And of course, then you've got our actual policy, if you want to summarise where we're at the moment, Labor's view for Australia, we've got a fair go plan. We want to see something done about jobs and wages. We want to make sure that we reverse the cuts to hospitals and schools. We want to make sure we get lower energy prices by embracing more renewables in our system. We will tackle climate change. We are determined to make sure that this economy is managed in the interests of working people. So yes, Malcolm Turnbull is right. Yes, they have a problem, that problem for Australia is that they can't get anything there, they are a mess. I promise Australians that in the next two months we'll talk more about you the people of Australia and less about ourselves.
JOURNALIST: Angus Taylor,  Angus Taylor has -
SHORTEN: I promise you I'm going to come back to you -
JOURNALIST: Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison has rejected calling the Chief Minister to include ACT Police under the new Integrity Commission. If you were elected would you commit to changing the Self Governing Act so that could happen or could you commit to having ACT Police come under your Federal ICAC?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, there are mechanisms to supervise any allegations of corruption within police and law enforcement in Australia but I would start off by picking up the phone and talking to Andrew Barr. I think the Chief Minister and the Government of the ACT have a legitimate interest in what's happened and what's being said. So we've said we want a National Anti-Corruption Commission, tick. But what we're also going to do is we'll work with the Territory Government here. It's just arrogant just to sort of - it's what people hate about politics - one bloke in one office in one building sending an email saying none of your business to someone else when in fact it's all of our business.
JOURNALIST: Angus Taylor has 66 firm power generation proposals on his desk for potential underwriting. What will the Shorten Government do with that list? Will you consider underwriting any of those projects and secondly do you accept that the Fair Work Act 2009 is the guidelines and the rulebook for the Fair Work Commission in determining the minimum wage and what you would hope would be a living wage.
SHORTEN: Well, let's just deal with Angus Taylor, I think he said in that famous interview on Insiders a couple of Sundays ago they had 66 offers and he didn't deny that ten of them to do with coal. I don't know what's on his list so asking me to agree with what's on his list without me seeing the list, I'm not going to do that. But I think the heart of your question goes to, would the Morrison Government invest in new coal fired power stations? I can be very clear because I have been for years: no taxpayer money for new coal fired power stations. The Morrison Government needs to decide what it's doing. Last week as we said, Angus Taylor said yep, up to ten projects, pretty interested. Yesterday, Mr Morrison seemed to be totally against that. Yesterday morning, in a remarkable contribution to radio journalism, Barnaby Joyce gave the very clear impression that he supports more coal fired power stations. And then of course, the Member for Goldstein today has said he doesn't. Can the Liberal Party and the National Party of Australia please tell us what's going on when it comes to what they're doing on coal fired power stations? In terms of your question about the act, the Fair Work Commission of course is bound by the act. But the act and the guidelines are not set in concrete, they can always be reformed -

JOURNALIST: But the act says that increased workforce participation, the needs of the low paid, various economic considerations are all part of the decision but it does not place primacy on any of those factors. Will Labor ask or will Labor legislate to give primacy to the needs of the low paid?

SHORTEN: Ben, what I will do is when we announce our policy, we'll make sure we give you all a heads up to be at the conference. What I am flagging to you, because Labor actually believes in having a wages policy, is the status quo is unsatisfactory. And don't take my word that the status quo on wages is unsatisfactory, go and ask most Australians who go to work. Eryk. No, I'll come to you next. I promised Eryk another go and then you.

JOURNALIST: What number would you put on a living wage?

SHORTEN: I think it's a bit early for us to do that. What I can do - because I'm not the Fair Work Commission - what I can do though is simply say this, $18.93 for an adult working full time is not enough -

JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the unions, 60 per cent?

SHORTEN: Sorry, I said I would go to - I said I'd come to you next.

JOURNALIST: So the Liberals have put a lot of obstacles between the light rail and the parliamentary approvals processes, <inaudible>, would you do anything to smooth the process through so a light rail stage two can happen?

SHORTEN: I don't know why the Liberals hate public transport around Australia. I think that's one of the great mysteries. It's up there with what does Stuart Robert upload and download on the Internet for $40,000? And it's probably up there - it's not quite up there with why did they get rid of Malcolm Turnbull? But it's one of those mysteries, isn't it? We will work creatively with the ACT Government. Sorry, you were next.

JOURNALIST: With Labor's response to the Banking Royal Commission, why have you ruled out changes around mortgage brokers? And with the Disability Royal Commission, why do think it is taking so long to get terms of reference?

SHORTEN: Well on mortgage brokers, we've suggested that the system needs to change but let's face it, mortgage brokers were not at the top of the hit list when the Banking Royal Commission was called for. We see that the bigger banks and the financial institutions as being the bigger priority. We accept after talking to mortgage brokers, that there is a gap in the market which they fill but we've also made it clear that we want the fees to be identified up front. In terms of the Disability Royal Commission - listen, I’m not going to, we got the government there. It was a messy process, wasn't it? They didn't want to do it, their senators voted against it on Thursday. After a lot of pressure from the community and Labor, and the crossbench and the Greens, the government caved by Monday. I'm not going to judge them too harshly about terms of reference between then and now because they've never really thought about it. It is important to talk to the states and territories. It's even more important to talk to people with disability. I'm pleased that we're getting a Royal Commission into the treatment of people with disability. Labor called for it two years ago. So I'll take the progress when I get it. I'm not going to throw bricks at the government. Obviously, we'd like to see the terms soon. It'd be great if they talk to us and they're doing some of that too. Sorry, Packy.

JOURNALIST: The unions 60 per cent of the medium wage, they say that's what a living wage is. Do you agree with that?

SHORTEN: Well unions are entitled to ask what they want - and that's what unions do, try and get better conditions for workers. I haven't formed a view on the answer to that question.

JOURNALIST: On Light Rail, will your contribution be capped at $200 million or will it go up potentially resulting on what the business case says?

SHORTEN: At this point, we've budgeted for $200 million. I mean, hats off - I was speaking to the Chief Minister - and he can talk a bit about some of the upside of this project - but this government did a fixed contract which meant that they kept the costs under control. So I think, perhaps unlike his colleague in New South Wales, the embattled Premier there - if you want to see Light Rail done properly, maybe Gladys should have come down and spoken to Andrew.

JOURNALIST: Just on emissions, Mr Shorten. Have you made a call yet on Kyoto carry-over credits which reduce your actual target from 45 to around 34?

SHORTEN: I got asked this yesterday, my answer hasn't changed from yesterday. We're still looking at that question. We will have more to say on climate. But I mean, when we talk about our climate policies, it's not exactly an unknown about many of the things we're doing. I wondered if, not you particularly, but I might get asked this. I just want to remind people what we've already said. Our target is to reduce emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. We want to pursue a bipartisan market mechanism - a National Energy Guarantee - and that'll help implement our commitment of 50 per cent renewable energy as part of our energy mix. Please remember that I've also said that a Labor Government wants to see a million batteries installed around Australia by 2025 and we've said we'll subsidise 100,000 for houses up to incomes up to $180,000 dollars. We've said that we will double the mandate of the CFC, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, who've been very successful. Also, we've said that we will contribute $5 billion towards strengthening our infrastructure in terms of energy security and transmission. And just to top it off, we've led the way on a debate about working on hydrogen energy, which is an exciting new source of energy. We want Gladstone to be the hydrogen capital of the energy superpower which Australia should be.

JOURNALIST: Hang on, hang on.

SHORTEN: Sorry. No, hang on. Sorry, Andrew, I'm going to go here.
JOURNALIST: On the Liberals and Nationals struggling with renewables (inaudible) communities in regional Australia and do you (inaudible). Are you worried about Labor's position in terms of inner-city seats and regional Australia? And on Kyoto credits, would you guarantee to make your position clear before the election?

SHORTEN: First of all, in terms of, you talk about regional seats and city seats - when I look at electorate, I just see Australians. I see Australians dealing with actually far more issues in common than I think a lot of the superficial analysis gives. Australians want to make sure that they have good jobs. Good jobs though which have job security, which pay well. They also want a government who's stable and united. They want to see a government who's going to tackle energy prices and get them down rather than going up and up and up. Australians are concerned that $2.8 billion has been cut from our hospitals, $360 million from preventative health programs, nearly $2 billion from aged care and of course, the patient rebate freeze has cost Australians and GPs, the frontline of our medical service, $3 billion. Australians are concerned that this is a government who cannot agree on climate change policy and they are fundamentally perturbed that everything's going up in Australia except their wages. So I don't accept that there are massive distinctions around Australia and that somehow this is an election of very different Australias. A lot of us have got a lot in common and if I'm Prime Minister and Labor and my united stable team is elected, we're going to work on what we agree on, we're going to bring people together. There's too much us and them in Australian life.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Because this question from David Speers is critical. If you do accept carbon credit carry-over, then your target goes from 45 to 34. Nations including New Zealand, Germany, Iceland, others say that they aren't going to use the carry-over. Wouldn't you be wimping it if you didn’t accept - if you did accept the carry-over?

SHORTEN: Well I know that the government's relying on it, so I'm sure you've accused them of wimping it. For us, we're having a look at the mechanism. We'll have more to say close to the election. I wish the election was this Saturday. I wish the circus which is the Coalition division was over. I can't speak for you - maybe it's good entertainment, but I tell you it for most Australians, they are sick and tired of the chaos in Canberra. They just want to have one Prime Minister for three years -

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

SHORTEN: Hang on - No, I haven't, Andrew but what I'm doing is actually going to what Australians raise with me every day. I'm here to represent Australians. Now, they say that they're sick of the circus in Canberra. We will unveil more of our climate policy -

JOURNALIST: This has been your target for some years now.

SHORTEN: I don't want to interrupt your questions at all with an answer but I just will finish the point on Andrew. You're making a point, we're saying, and I've said politely a number of times, I'll continue to say politely, we will announce our climate policy before the election. But the election hasn't actually been called yet. And I think in all fairness, you know you had a little dig there about give us an answer. I think if you're being really fair in retrospect, my opposition has been more honest with the Australian people on more policies and more reforms than you have seen in your time working in Canberra. So I don't agree that we're not prepared to give answers but we're not prepared to do at all today.

JOURNALIST: Will you apply that 45 per cent to the transport sector and the agricultural sector?

SHORTEN: We will announce all of that as we finalise our policy.

JOURNALIST:  But how do you get, how do you get to 45 per cent -

SHORTEN: Guys, our climate change policies will be for the -

JOURNALIST: - 45 per cent across the board?

SHORTEN: Packy, I know you guys want me to do the whole campaign launch today. I'm not going -

JOURNALIST: What is your policy though?

SHORTEN: Packy, I've said we're going to announce it before the election.

JOURNALIST: It’s a press conference Mr Shorten.

SHORTEN: It's a reasonable question and I've given a reasonable answer.

JOURNALIST:  $200 million on something that the first stage, we don't even know if it is viable? We don't even know whether it's a dud or not?

SHORTEN: Guys, can I tell you about the cities in the world who had trams and ripped them up? They want them back. Go and talk to someone in Brisbane when they ripped up the trams in 1969. Talk to the people in Sydney - and now, they're getting Light Rail and they're coming across, would you believe it, some of the buried track when they used to have trams, No town, no city ever goes backwards having light rail and tram. I'm a Melburnian, we've had them for 130, 140 years and we wouldn't give up our trams for all the tea in China. Sorry, I'm going to share the questions around.

JOURNALIST: There’s division in the Nationals around coal, do you think energy could be factor in yet another leadership crisis?

SHORTEN: You've got to admit, it is one of the mysteries of Australian politics - it's like the Bermuda Triangle of Australian politics, conservatives and energy policy. Why do they find it so hard to acknowledge that renewable energy is a good thing and it's going to expand, that it's a cheaper technology, it's getting better? Why do they find it so hard to acknowledge that two million Australian households have renewable energy?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Paris agreement is economy wide, not just the electricity sector. Are you signalling here that your 45 per cent may not be economy wide?

SHORTEN: No, I'm not signalling anything over than - Sorry, Packy, I've got to say that every time someone's asked the question - Sorry, every time I've been asked, you've come in before I get my first word out. We will announce our climate policy before the election. I understand - I understand your enthusiasm -

JOURNALIST: Do you want a small increment Mr Shorten?

SHORTEN: Okay guys. Well, I've just read out eight features of our policy and we will have more to say. It would really help, I tell you what, if we could get the government to confirm: is the election going to be on May 18th or May 25th? Because then we can roll out the rest of our policies. And I think as we close this press conference - we've done 15 or 18 questions - I'll just say this: the Labor Party will not take a backward step in terms of talking about the issues which affect Australians: energy, health, education, jobs and wages, real action on climate change. Will have a lot more to say on all of this. Thank you, everybody. Nice to see you all.

DES HARDMAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FORDE: Good afternoon everybody. I'm Des Hardman, I'm Labor's candidate for Forde at the upcoming federal election. We've had a visit here today to Carlton United Breweries which is in the heart of the industrial area here of Forde and a really, really important area to the economy not only of our electorate but of our local communities surrounding as well. I'm here with Bill Shorten, Leader of the Opposition we've been fortunate enough to take a bit of a tour around the brewery to see the impressive work that goes on here by the local brewers. I was particularly impressed by their focus on safety and quality of their product and how important that is to us and very many Australians. Thank you very much for being here today and I'll hand it over to Bill.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Des. Hello everybody, it's great to be here on a Monday, Labour Day in Melbourne and me visiting Yatala. It's a fantastic brewery I really am very impressed by the management of the workforce I've met here and along with Des Hardman and Senator Murray Watt on a very clear message to the workforce of the Yatala brewery and beyond that to workers in Queensland and right through Australia. If we get elected to government I promise you we won't spend our time talking about the Coalition. We're going to focus on the battle against the cost of living in Australian families. We are going to do that by offering better tax cuts, bigger, better tax cuts for upwards of eight, nine million Australian workers and of course we'll get wages moving again in Australia. It's great to be up here in south east Queensland, our next stop will be to announce $112 million support for the third stage of the Gold Coast light railway and that'll help generate jobs, tourism, more apprenticeships and it will also help ease the congestion for this fastest growing area of Australia. But today my message to a really good workforce who is doing their level best, the manufacturing workforce competing with the world is - we've got your back on manufacturing, we've got your back on apprenticeships, we've got your back on wages and we've got your back on better tax cuts and I promised them that if we get elected in the election in nine or ten weeks’ time we won't be talking about our opponents. We'll be talking about the cost of living pressures for Australians and our plan to look after them with better wages and of course better, bigger tax cuts. Happy to take questions.

JOURNLAIST: Mr Shorten tell me for a brewery worker here with your tax cuts what will they take home in their pocket?

SHORTEN: Well if you're earning $90,000 a year here it'll be about $928 each year. So you might have - let's take a family here who might be someone works here on the production line, skilled operators. This is a long standing workforce too so they're very good at their job. They might have a spouse who works at the local hospital who might be $60,000 - $70,000 a year, under Labor in our first three years you'll be getting a tax refund of somewhere approaching $6,000. When you combine that with our policy on wages to turn the minimum wage into a living wage. To reverse the arbitrary cuts to penalty rates in retail and hospitality. When we're going to clamp down on subbies being ripped off by unscrupulous company directors. When we make sure that labour hire isn't just an excuse to be a race to the bottom in wages. We've got a genuine plan which is in touch with what's happening in south east Queensland and indeed the whole of Australia.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten an issue that some Queensland MPs are talking a lot about is coal-fired generation. Barnaby Joyce says the Liberals and Nationals aren't married on this issue, should the public be concerned about the split there?

SHORTEN: Listen I don't really want to talk about the Coalition but I think it's fair to say, this is probably the most divided government in recent generations. I mean, the Liberals are divided, they can't agree on who the leader should have been. They can't agree on whether or not to give women a fair go, they can't even agree on energy or climate policy. And then you turn to the National Party, you know they can't agree on whether their leader should be Barnaby Joyce or Michael McCormack. They can't agree about whether it's a good idea to privatise Queensland power, they can't agree even on their coal lines. So, I think Australians are over the division and that is why I promise Australians that if we get elected, we 're not going to talk about our opponents, we are going to talk about you, the people of Australia. The reality is that everything in Australia is going up except people's wages, but the workers of Australia feel that the government doesn't have their back and that they have turned their back on workers. Well, I have got the back of the workers. We'll make sure we get wages moving and we'll make sure that you get bigger, better tax cuts.

JOURNALIST: When should the public find out whether the Government would invest in new coal-fired generation, do you think it should be before the election that the public should know that?

SHORTEN: The government just doesn't have one line on coal. Now, coal is important. It is part of our export mix going forward, very important part of our export mix. We're still going to use fossil fuels as part of our energy, but coal has become a very divisive issue in the government with the Queensland conservatives not agreeing with the Victorian conservatives. We saw the train-wreck interview of their latest Minister, Minister Reynolds. This government, because they don't like renewables gets obsessed about coal to the cost of everything else. For me it is about lower energy prices, for me it's about not handing on a worse deal to our kids and taking real action on climate change. This is a divided government - I think this is probably the most divided government in many generations.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) phase out coal fired power station under your plan to increase emissions targets?

SHORTEN: No, what'll happen is I saw the government today doing what they do best, lying about Labor's position. Coal is going to be part of our energy mix going forward, but we are not going to put all of our eggs in the coal basket. The reality is that climate change is real. We have experienced one of the hottest summers and in many cases the hottest summer on record. Australians are also experiencing massive spikes in increase in energy prices. Households and businesses are sick and tired of a government in Canberra who can't agree on what to do about energy prices and climate change, but the problem is that the dysfunctional division, chaos and instability of their government is costing Australians in their hip pocket. Because the longer it takes for the government to work out one position on energy, what that means is there is no new investment in energy generation, which means that we are asking to do more with less energy which pushes prices up. This government can't be trusted on energy and they can't be trusted on climate change. They've had six years or the best part of six years -  to give this government another three years to hope that they will do in the next three years what they haven't done in the last six years is the triumph of hope over experience.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten the Budget is coming up, they're talking about the government may well need something to really get their selves going - (inaudible) change in the polling, change in the opinions after the Budget?

SHORTEN: Listen, I think that the government is going to try and issue a propaganda document called the Budget. I think they are going to try and chase votes. Really, I think the question you have got to ask yourselves is: What is it they are going to do on April 2nd that they haven't done in the previous six years? I mean, we are on our third Prime Minister under this crew. You have got the national party, a divided (inaudible) and you have got their 12th energy policy, they've had  22 reshuffles. This is a government, who the Australian people have generously given them a second chance in 2016. Unfortunately, the government hasn't lived up to the promises. In fact, they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and never explained why. But the real problem isn't even the internal instability of the government and the fact that they all seem to hate each other and can't wait to tell us how much they hate each other. The real problem is that the price of everything is going up except peoples wages. We're becoming a more unequal society. What happens is corporate profits in the last 12 months under the Liberals has gone up 10 percent, but wages have gone up 2 percent. What we've seeing is a more unequal society. Only Labor is going to properly fund the cuts that the Government made to the hospitals. We are going to make sure that your kids get the best quality education from the early years, right through to TAFE, university and of course in our schools. We can do this because we are making hard economic decisions. And the other thing we're going to do is get people's wages moving again. Australians are over politicians talking about themselves. They want the political class of this country to talk about the workers, talk about small business and talk about the farmers. That is exactly what I am doing here today in Yatala.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten there seems to be some confusion about whether Labor will count the Kyoto credits towards your emissions reduction targets (inaudible).

SHORTEN: Well, I've said that we are taking that under advice about how much we should do that, so we are still looking at that question.

JOURNALIST: When will you announce your policy on that?

SHORTEN: Before the election, but of course you know I love this - the government has had 12 energy policies. There is no point in asking a government energy policy out on a date because it will be different by the time the date arrives. This is a government who cannot agree on energy. They are at war with themselves and it would almost be a circus, except it is actually costing Australian businesses and costing Australian families. Everyone knows that it has become an unpleasant adventure to open an energy bill from a company these days because you know it's going up and up. The price of gas has gone up and up, the price of electricity gone up, up and up. We have a government that doesn't like renewable energy. If two million Australian households have got solar power on their rooftops, why is the Government so far behind the people that it doesn't want to do anything on energy prices.

JOURNALIST: So what is the cheapest source of power; coal or renewables?

SHORTEN: There's no doubt renewable energy is becoming the cheapest. But in Labor's policy, we will have some coal, we'll have some gas and of course, we will also have a lot more renewable energy. It's a mix and that's what we've got to do. But just pretending that we can do business as usual, pretending that they're going to build a whole paddock full of new coal fired power stations which are very expensive -  it's just ridiculous. It's not actually offering a plan for the future, it's offering a photo of the past.
JOURNALIST: When you're Prime Minister, will you stop the building of any more - any more coal fired power stations?

SHORTEN: I think the market is going to deal with the questions which you are asking me about. What I want to do is I want Australia to go back to being an energy superpower. I'm sick and tired of watching our gas be exported overseas, purchased more cheaply overseas than Australian business can have it. Coal will still be in our mix. What I'm not going to do is tell people that you don't need to change. Two million Australian households already have solar on the rooftops. They have solar on their rooftops and they're not ripping them off at hundreds of thousands are they. Most Australians, when they look at solar on other people's rooftops, would like to get solar on their own rooftops. So if the Australian people have worked out the best way to deal with energy prices, why can't the Government in Canberra?

JOURNALIST: Will there be (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: There's no doubt that we need to have more developed policies on climate change, and we'll announce more of our climate policies closer to the election. But the idea that we can go business as usual and think that you don't have to try to get the emissions down is just ridiculous. I think the Government needs to come clean today; are they going to build more coal fired power stations or are they not? Or are they just going to keep talking about it and having an ongoing argument for the next nine weeks? We've got a good policy. We want to see 50 per cent of our energy mix by 2030 being renewables. We recognise there is a role for existing fossil fuel industries - that's coal and gas but we also want to lean in and support the development of more renewable energy. We should be an energy superpower and we're an energy midget - and we've got to change that. And Australian households and businesses are paying the price because of the ongoing instability and chaos in the Government in Canberra. One last question and we're got to go to our next engagement.

JOURNALIST: There is a proposal to scrap the election eve ban on TV campaign advertising. Do you think the ban is outdated?

SHORTEN: No, I think that if we have a long election, it doesn't hurt to give people 48 hours break before they go to the polls, on the electronic advertising. You know, the real issue though here is that the Government has got another proposal to let their politicians spend money they get for expenses on television ads. I think instead of the Government trying to find new ways to spend money on television ads - we're all a bit over the digital pollution, including that by Clive Palmer. I would like to see the Government support more transparent donation laws. I think if you're going to give a politician more than a thousand dollars, you should have that, your identity and the donation disclosed in real time. And I think there's no reason why the Government couldn't do that now to restore people's faith in our political system.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just to ask you about the latest polls. Are you ready to be Prime Minister?

SHORTEN: I'm ready to be Prime Minister but in terms of the polls, I've had a basic rule for the last five and a half years: whether or not they're good, bad or indifferent, I don't talk about them. More importantly than that basic rule, I understand that there are more important things to talk about than opinion polls. What the Australian people want to hear me and other politicians talk about is the people. And I think one of their number one issues they want to hear us talk about is the plan we have to deal with the fact that everything is going up except your wages. Well today, I was able to tell brewery workers in the Yatala, I can tell farmers in the bush, I can tell small businesses in Western Sydney - we have got a plan to give you a better, fairer tax cuts. We have got a plan to tackle energy prices. We've got a plan to restore funding to our hospitals, our Medicare and our schools and we've got a plan to help get wages moving again. That's our plan and we look forward to talking to it between now, every day now until the next election. Thanks everybody, cheers.

SUBJECT: Labor’s $112 million commitment to light rail on the Gold Coast; The LNP taking the Gold Coast for granted
MURRAY WATT, LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Well thanks everyone for coming along today, it's great to be here at the Helensvale Light Rail Station, and I should mention at the outset that we're getting the 136 tram, so we will have a limited period here for chatting. The reason we're here today is to make an announcement about light rail, and when you think about it, Federal Labor and State Labor have really built the Gold Coast. It was Federal Labor that delivered funding for Stage 1 of the light rail, it was State and Federal Labor that built Metricon Stadium, the CBUS Stadium as it was then known, the Gold Coast Hospital, all sorts of schools, M1 upgrades and here we are again today announcing funding for the Gold Coast light rail stage 3. So Labor is serious about the Gold Coast, and we're serious about building the Gold Coast going forward. It's great to be joined by all of the Gold Coast candidates, we've got Tracy, Aaron, Luz, and Des but now I'd like to hand over to Bill Shorten, the Federal Opposition Leader - thanks Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hello everyone, thanks Murray for that introduction. Great to be here with our candidates because we are going to show that Labor intends to make the Gold Coast marginal for the Government. We are here to win every vote we can, and one of the things we're offering people on the Gold Coast is better public transport and more jobs. So I'm pleased today as part of our commitment, to jobs, to local tourism, to decongesting the traffic, and of course to making sure that we have more public transport, Labor if elected will commit $112 million to stage 3A, which will see the light rail, the trams be extended from Broadbeach all the way down to Burleigh Heads. This is 7km of track, it's 2,400 jobs. It's going to connect also the light rail and the trams up with the heavy rail here - it's just great news. The Gold Coast is one of the most go ahead areas in Australia, but the area has grown, but the politicians in Canberra haven't always kept up with the growth in the area. Well I'm here to fix that problem. Labor is committed to $112 million which will see the light rail extended another 7kms, all the way to Burleigh Heads and we will create 2,400 jobs in the process. Good for tourism, good for public transport, good for the locals, and of course good for the environment - trams are very environmentally friendly. Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, how is your offer any different to what's already been put up?

SHORTEN: Well we're matching what the Government's said, but I would also point out to you that we've got the runs on the board. From 2009 as Murray said through the stadium, through to our commitments. The Gold Coast has been taken for granted by the LNP. You've got the retiring Minister Ciobo, you've got the Member for McPherson, and of course you've got Minister Stuart Roberts the famous uploader and downloader using $40,000 of taxpayer money for you know, we've never found out what. The reality is the LNP takes the Gold Coast for granted. The LNP has been crowing and crowing and crowing and what have we seen for the Gold Coast from the LNP? Big fat zip. If you want to have imagination go to a political party who doesn't take your vote for granted. I mean, a classic example of how the Gold Coast has been left in the lurch by this out of touch government, is that 50,000 people have had their penalty rates cut. The Gold Coast is ground zero for wage cutting in the nation when it comes to hospitality and retail, and this government's got nothing to say about it. The problem in the Gold Coast is that everything's going up except your wages. Well Labor's here to change that and we're going to provide better, fairer tax cuts for people who live on the Gold Coast. We've got a wages policy something the government don't have and yes we are committed to building the infrastructure which the Gold Coast needs.
JOURNALIST: Just specific though, you mentioned there, you just said there that you're matching what's already been offered. But you said they've done 'zip'? So if you're saying you are matching how does that work?

SHORTEN: What I am doing is giving you a history lesson in who has got the ball rolling here. The reality is that the only reason that we're standing here at a light rail facility is because Labor in 2009 pushed it. I mean it's how politics works on the Gold Coast. The LNP collect the votes and don't do the work, we're turning up and saying give us a chance, we will do the work.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten have you perhaps missed a chance to trump the LNP and pledge (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: I think the LNP have been missing in action for the last six years. Ask yourselves, what has this government done to help provide tax relief for working citizens of the Gold Coast? What has this LNP Government in Canberra done to restore people's penalty rates? Energy prices are going up and up and up, they've frozen the Medicare patient refund so people are paying more out of pocket costs. Did you know on the Gold Coast on average it's about 25 per cent more out of pocket payment to see a GP, 40 per cent across Australia as well, to see a specialist. This is a government who doesn't know that cost of living is a giant issue on the Gold Coast, but what we're doing here is we're providing a rail option or tram options for people. We're also going to provide more jobs hopefully, but we've also got a plan to get wages moving and to tackle cost of living. You know, I think what the LNP needs on the Gold Coast is a big giant wake up call. They're either running out the door like Steve Ciobo, or they're missing in action like some of the other members of parliament.  Labor's here because we're hungry for the votes of people on the Gold Coast and we're going to demonstrate it by doing the things that people on the Gold Coast need, rather than fighting amongst ourselves.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in the Queensland Government to put up their share?

SHORTEN: Listen, Annastacia Palaszczuk is so much more pro-Queensland than the current Prime Minister in Canberra ever will be. I haven't come here to give a lecture to the Queensland Government, I've come here to say that a Federal Labor Government in Canberra, with our great candidates, we will stop treating the Gold Coast as the forgotten zone of Australian politics. It is a fact, and you all know it and people know it, that because these seats have traditionally, in particular Moncrieff, McPherson and Fadden, voted loyally for the LNP.


JOURNALIST: Bill, there are some pretty big plans for the light rail future extensions. Would a Labor Government's support further extensions to say, the airport, the Spit, that kind of thing?

SHORTEN: Well obviously, once we've done stage 3A then Stage 3B comes on the table. The ideal path would be to see a connection all the way from here right down to the airport. But you know let's do the next stage. Stage 3A is the next step. But I'm a Victorian, which means that you know, we've been to the Gold Coast and a lot of Victorians moved up here, which is a good thing on balance, I suggest. But we get it. We get the Gold Coast in a way which I'm not sure that the Government in Canberra do. I want to see more public transport, I want to see more jobs, I want to see wages moving, I want to see real action on cost of living, better hospitals, better schools. I think we've got to catch a tram soon, they don't just wait for us. See you, thanks everyone.

PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Thanks very much for coming. Can I welcome Bill again to Adelaide. It's wonderful for you to be here in South Australia. It's great, the announcement that you're making today for Adelaide. We're here with all of the South Australian Labor team, so Members, Senators and candidates because building South Australia, building the infrastructure here in South Australia, is a Labor priority, and it's part of our plan for a fair go for Australia, a fair go for South Australia. As I said I'm here with all of our team. I do want to particularly mention Cressida O'Hanlon who's been announced today as our candidate for Sturt. And we look forward to her joining us in the Federal Parliament. I going to throw now to Nadia Clancy, she is our candidate for Boothby, and much of the announcement today falls in her electorate, and she's going to briefly tell us why it's such an important announcement and then you'll hear from Bill.

NADIA CLANCY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BOOTHBY: Thanks Penny. This is a really exciting announcement for the people of Boothby who are spending far too much time sitting in their cars just going to and from work at the moment. And I think you can really tell when a road isn't working when it's busy at one o'clock on a Wednesday, it's busy all week round, and so I'm really, really excited that Labor's going to get this done.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks well Happy International Women's Day everybody, and it's great to be here doing this announcement with many members of our South Australian team, including our fabulous new candidate running in the seat of Sturt, Cressida O'Hanlon, and I'll say more about her in a moment. And I'd like to congratulate in particular Nadia Clancy, our candidate in Boothby who's been most diligent in advocating for what I'm about to say. A Labor Government if elected, from our very first budget, will invest $1.2 billion in the next stage to upgrade the South Road. I understand from talking to family and friends that even this week the South Road has been - the travel up there, has been of great delay and frustration to commuters. For too long South Australia has missed out on its fair share of infrastructure funding. That will end if Labor gets elected at the next election. And what we're going to make sure of is that not only does the money get invested to help ease the commuter congestion experience, but what we also want to do is to make sure that we employ locals when the contracts get allocated. So when you line up our $1.2 billion commitment, what we'll also do is make sure that at least one in 10 of the people employed on the project are apprentices. We will also make sure that we have a real priority on local procurement. We want to see local contractors and the local builders get the opportunity to do the work here. We know that building roads is not just good for productivity, not just good for efficiency in terms of fuel usage and costs, not just good to help commuters spend more time with their families rather than stuck in traffic, but these roads are jobs generators. So this is part of our plan for South Australia. Before we take questions on this, I said I'd also talk a little bit about Cressida O'Hanlon. How lucky are we that we're running Cressida in the seat of Sturt. Traditionally Sturt's been perhaps put as just a bit too far for Labor to win, but with the current member leaving, forming a view perhaps about the prospects for the government, well then we think that Sturt's competitive and this can only be good news for the voters in Sturt. Our candidate Cressida O'Hanlon is a person who's very well credentialed to serve in public life. She's lived and worked on a farm for over a decade, of course experiencing terrible drought meant that they had to move off the land. She is a mother of four. Her husband served in the Australian military for 23 years. She is a small business woman, she is a dispute mediator - not bad skills to have in Canberra let me assure you. So she's a really tip top candidate, and whilst we're the underdog in Sturt, no one thinks other than that, we are determined to give people a real choice and that's what we're doing. And when you look at our fabulous candidate running in Boothby, Nadia Clancy and her skill at advocacy already demonstrable by this commitment on the next stage of the South Road, and the most important connector really in Adelaide, it just shows you that Labor not only is not taking Adelaide for granted or South Australia, we want to do good things for South Australia and today's announcement is part of that ongoing commitment. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the state Liberal Government seems underwhelmed by your generosity put for South Road, saying well A, it's not ready to get yet, it's not shovel ready so the money would essentially have to be put in a holding account, and B, you're too late to the table anyway.

SHORTEN: Could they make up their mind what the criticism is? Are we too late or too early? Now listen, I understand that Premier Marshall's got himself into hot water by being a bit of a butler to the Federal Liberal Government with the very poor position they've taken on water from the Murray-Darling. But what I just say to Premier Marshall is we understand you've got to say your political things, but don't worry, if you want to get things done, we're just the ticket for South Australia. We understand the business case needs to be fully completed but you don't need to be a Rhodes Scholar to work out that this is the number one commuting infrastructure challenge for motorists in Adelaide. We've got the money, because we've made the difficult reform decisions. So we're ready. I hope the South Australian Government doesn't drag its feet coming the party on this, but we'll work with them. So I understand that he feels, you know, he's got to send up a little flare sign to help signal that he still sort of, likes the Liberals in Canberra, but I think he's like most South Australians, he knows the sooner we can get a Labor Government in Canberra, that means more jobs for South Australia.

JOURNALIST: Just on Sturt -

SHORTEN: He was next, and then I’m happy to come to you.

JOURNALIST: What's the point though in locking up money in a project the State Government says is not ready to go yet, when you could put money toward other projects in Adelaide?

SHORTEN: First of all, it's not the only project we're going to do in South Australia. But secondly, what's the point of a South Australian Liberal government not getting on with a major infrastructure challenge. The good news here is you don’t have to take my word for it being important, why don't you do a quick poll of all the motorists this week, the problem is there now. I'm not going to be one of those sort of politicians who go State/Federal arguing over everything. But I'd just say to the South Australian State Government if you're not ready to deal with a major infrastructure challenge, then maybe you need to look in the mirror as to what the problem is. We'll work with them - no matter who's in power in South Australia, we'll work with them. But again we're doing what the people are asking for. That's as simple as that.

JOURNALIST: Is this a bad sign you know, if you were to become Prime Minister you have to deal with a State Liberal Government that doesn't want to play ball. Are you worried about how that relationship will go?

SHORTEN: All I'm worried about is that motorists don't get stuck in traffic jams. All I'm worried about is the cost to motorists, the loss of productivity, the loss of potential jobs for South Australia. This is a good project and I just say the Premier Marshall - don't fall for the old politics of the current mob in Canberra, where whenever Labor has a good idea they just feel the need to get a stick out and scare people. This is a good idea. I just speak to the viewers at home tonight and the readers of South Australian media tomorrow morning - would you like to see improvements to the South Road? Would you like to see the next stage of the works be completed? If you would, vote Labor in the next election.

JOURNALIST: Surely you're viewing Sturt - or Labor winning Sturt as you know, it would be a bonus and almost your entire resources are going to go into Boothby. Is it fair to assume?

SHORTEN: No, we don't take any seat for granted, that's why it doesn't matter if it's Adelaide, or Hindmarsh, or Kingston, or Wakefield, or Macon, or Boothby or indeed Sturt. We want as many people as possible to vote for us all over South Australia and Australia. Boothby is a very hard ask, Labor hasn't traditionally been successful even though we've tried very hard in the past. But I think we've got all of the elements favouring us to be very competitive. First of all we've got a great candidate, very hard working. Secondly, unlike the Liberals in Canberra we know where South Australia is. We want the Murray to flow for example. We're not just a party of the northern irrigators, we're a party for South Australians. But pick another example. We've had stability for the last five and a half years. I noticed that the second of the three Liberal Prime Ministers they had, has gone to England to have an attack on the current government. You know, poor old Mr Turnbull - no one in his party has explained to him why he's still not the Prime Minister. And what we see is from the overnight attack by Mr Turnbull, we see that it doesn't matter what day of the week it is, the Liberal Party still hate each other as much as ever. So that's why we're competitive in Boothby, that's why we're going to try our best in Sturt with a fabulous candidate. Because the Australian people are sick and tired of political infighting, they just want some stability, and I'm sure there'll be perhaps dyed in the wool Liberal voters in Sturt and Boothby who mightn’t have traditionally thought about voting Labor, this time they're going to go well after 2,000 days of Liberal government, what have we got to show in South Australia? And they might say we're just sick of the instability. Why not vote for a party who's going to guarantee you one Prime Minister over the duration of the next three years.

JOURNALIST: Nominations for the Liberal Party preselection in Sturt close today. There have been a number of moderates in that party talking about wanting a woman to run for Sturt. Are we in a situation where the moderates are saying - the Liberal Party is saying we want a woman but we won't vote for one?

SHORTEN: I'm going to get Penny to talk more about what's happening in South Australia, I can't - I'm not going to be a commentator on the Liberal Party's civil war. Who they pick - it doesn't fuss us who they pick, because we've already got a better candidate. But I do think that today we've seen major fault lines emerge yet again in the Morrison Government. You've got the former Prime Minister Turnbull going on television overnight, basically complaining that he still doesn't know why they got rid of him.  You know, this latest outbreak of division highlights that the Liberal Party still essentially hate each other and can't stop talking about themselves.

JOURNALIST: Mr Turnbull may have been speaking the truth though, it might be dead right that the right in the Party fear that he could sneak over the line in the next election and with the greatest respect be stuck with him for three years.

SHORTEN: Well, as I said in another context about Julie Bishop last week, we'll never know. We'll never know if Malcolm Turnbull could have won the last election. He still doesn't know why he is not the Prime Minister now. It is a very unsatisfactory state of affairs at the heart of this government, that they just won't explain why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull. I mean, I think the message to the people of Australia from Mr Turnbull's contribution overnight, is that the Liberal Party still hate each other as much as ever. And meanwhile everything is going up in Australia except people's wages.

WONG: Sorry, sorry I just wanted to make one comment about the discussion inside the Liberal Party about female representation and deciding that they might want a candidate for Sturt. As Bill said first we don't mind who we face, we're going to fight as hard as we can for that seat. But more importantly, you know there's an election coming when the Liberal Party suddenly start talking about women's representation again. So we’re all supposed to forget the last five and a half years, in fact the last 20 years and the way in which women in that party out of their own mouths, have not been supported or have been bullied, demonstrably have not been supported into Parliament, demonstrably have not been supported in leadership. But we're all supposed to forget that on the eve of an election and somehow think that they actually do care about equal representation of women. So it doesn't matter who they preselect, we'll fight them as hard as we can, we're going to take this seat seriously. But it also doesn't matter if they do preselect a woman or not, because we all know what they really think, and what they really think we've seen over the last half decade. It's a bit like climate change, you can always tell there's an election coming when the Liberal Party starts to talk about climate change again because they want to pretend they care about it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten just on talking about former Prime Ministers, what do you make of Tony Abbott's backflip this morning about withdrawing from the Paris Agreement?

SHORTEN: I think Penny sort of telepathically read your mind about that question. Does anyone seriously believe that Tony Abbott believes in climate change? He's under pressure in his own seat so now all of a sudden he's a born again lefty on climate change - spare me. I noticed that Mr Turnbull is tweeting against Mr Abbott today. Mr Abbott said this morning apparently that he's changed his mind, he's had another conversion, he's had plenty of conversions in different directions on this issue, and then Mr Turnbull's tweeted his criticism of Mr Abbott's point of view. The Liberal Party, they just can't get their act together. If you want to see real action on climate change then you vote Labor. If you want to get lower energy prices because of greater investment in renewable energy, then you just vote Labor. If Tony Abbott says he believes in climate change you know I've got a - it's rubbish.

JOURNALIST: The government says that your figures on the North-South corridor are a little bit off and it'll cost about $5 billion. What do you say to that, do you have the figures right?

SHORTEN:  Yes we have. There's been previous investment. We understand that more work will have to be done even beyond what we're proposing. But right now today, I just want to speak to all the commuters who use that road. We have got a costed proposition with money set aside in the budget to pay to upgrade this road.  At the end of the day voters are entitled to say when they look at both political parties, what's in it for us, what's in it for the people, why should we vote for you. We have got the ability in the budget and we're making our pledge well before an election. We're saying we're putting aside $1.2 billion, we want to get going. We want to make sure that we can help ease the congestion on the most important north-south arterial in Adelaide. This is long overdue, we're prepared to do it.

JOURNALIST: Will that leave the job half done?

SHORTEN: Well each road always has upgraded stages. When the road was first done, then you needed to do the next stage and then the next stage. We will absolutely work with the State Government. Of course we want to see their business case and their propositions, but what I'm doing is I want to be a leader for all Australia and that includes South Australia. I don't think South Australia has had its fair share of road and public transport investment in the last six years. What I'm saying here today, because of the advocacy of Nadia Clancy, Labor's candidate in Boothby, because of the work of the South Australian Labor team led by Senator Penny Wong, we are in a position to make a costed promise to be able to deliver  $1.2 billion which is absolutely going to mean that people won't get stuck in the sort of traffic jams that they're seeing right now.

JOURNALIST: But what does that costing look like, is it a widening, bridges, tunnels, what exactly?

SHORTEN: It will be a range - well the issue of tunnels still has to be worked on. We're waiting to see what the view of the State Government is on that. We've said that our first priority and we're suggesting this to the South Australian Government, should be from the Glenelg Tram Overpass to Tonsley, we think that's an important part of which should be prioritised early on.

JOURNALIST: The state is talking about one option being tunnelled, the whole thing at once, in one gigantic project rather than breaking it into bits, and it has been held back.

SHORTEN: Well first of all, the South Australian Government's welcome to put up its bids, but what I think about when I talk about this project is the people who are in the traffic this week. You know, you can have whatever pie in the sky that the government, the Liberals may be talking about, we want to get on and do it. We've got a whole raft of road proposals all around Australia and not only in the cities in regional Australia. We're also committed to improving public transport options. We're here saying that we respect Adelaide. People talk in South Australia, are they losing political influence in Canberra? You might be under the Liberals with the departure of senior Liberal Christopher Pyne, but with Penny Wong being in the leadership of the Labor Party and Don Farrell, her deputy in the leadership of the Labor Party. When it comes to decisions in Canberra, South Australian Labor punches above its weight. And I'm here today to say that the election may or may not be decided by seats in South Australia, but that isn't what influences us. We want to make sure that people have got proper ways of getting to work, more efficient, more effective and more importantly getting home from work.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned local procurement being a goal for this project, do you have a minimum percentage of locals working on it?

SHORTEN: Listen on our procurement policy, we haven't put a percentage number, but what we're going to ask is for participation plans from people who've bid for Commonwealth contracts. And what we want these participation plans to do, is to demonstrate what is the local content. We have put a number on our apprentices. What we say is if you've got a project which is attracting Commonwealth taxpayer support, we want to see one in 10 of the people employed being apprentices.
JOURNALIST: But Penny Wong, you want a minimum percentage on the subs project, shouldn't that apply here as well?

WONG: Hang on, hang on, hang on. And can I just say about your questions about funding, you could ask the Premier, Mr Marshall why it's a fine for the Liberals to talk about this in the never-never but not good for Labor to promise it up - earlier during the forward estimates period. I mean surely he'd want funding for the South Australians ahead of time. We have been really clear and Bill, under Bill's leadership in particular, really clear about minimum percentages on apprenticeships and about maximising Australian participation, but the subs is a very clear broken promise. You were told, all of you were told, before the last election after South Australians had made sure the subs would be built here after Tony Abbott wanted to send them to Japan. You were told 90 per cent minimum local build, then you were told 60 per cent and now there is no minimum. So I think that is a very clear breach of promise to South Australia.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can I just ask Labor's announcement this week to tie hospital funding to the provision of abortion services, was that discussed or signed off by your leadership group?

SHORTEN: Without going into all our processes this decision is supported by our party full stop, absolutely. And let's just talk about this issue very briefly, I mean it's been covered off. I think that women have, and it's a very - I'm going to make this point because it's International Women's Day. Women have the right to control their own health decisions, and that's what we're doing, we're reflecting that. They shouldn't have to pay thousands of dollars, run the gauntlet in some of the private clinics to some of the abuse they receive. We're not going to make religious institutions or faithful - particular people of faith carry out procedures that are contrary to their faith. But women in Australia have the right to control their own health decisions. And on International Women's Day I also want to say that we don't, we are not going to be the country we should be unless women in Australia are treated equally to men. Labor's got policies from political representation and quotas right through to board representation, right through to tackling domestic violence - which is the most extreme form of the lack of control of women have in their lives and inequality they receive, right through to lifting wages. I'll just finish on this. Senator Cormann made I thought, a very ill advised comment if somewhat honest, where he said today that when asked about low wages, he said that the low wages outcome is part of a carefully designed architecture of government economic policy. Well isn't that amazing. To every Australian who hasn't had a wage rise in the last five years, to every Australian who's working in labour hire, casual contract work, subbies not getting paid, people who don't have certainty of whether or not they've got a shift of work the next day. To all those hundreds of thousands of Australians who’d like more hours of work than they're getting, be happy because this is all part of the Government's plan. They think the only way they can run an economy is making sure that millions of people don't get a wage rise, don't have secure employment, don't get a fair go at work. This is the Liberal economic plan for Australia. Look after the top end of town and the rest of you, well just be happy that you've got a job.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, once upon a time being Opposition Leader in this country was considered one of the hardest jobs.

SHORTEN: It still is.

JOURNALIST: Right now in the political climate, is this one of the easiest?

SHORTEN: No I mean, I am very lucky that I have such a great team behind me and I've got a very talented frontbench, I've got a very talented backbench. And I'm grateful to the contribution that South Australian Labor makes by providing me such outstanding Members of Parliament and candidates. So that always improves the you know, the ability to do the job. Also, I just should acknowledge that it's been about 2000 days, not quite but just a few days short that I've been Leader of the Opposition. That makes me other than John Howard, the longest serving leader of a political party in the 21st century. But that stability is through the unity of the whole of the Labor Party, and the union movement, and I appreciate their support. So I've got the talented people, I've got a united team and we've been doing the policy work. But what makes me particularly privileged to do this job is within about eight or ten weeks I'll be able to present Labor's plan to all Australians. Our plan is a fair go action plan. We want to make sure that the economy is managed in the interests of working and middle class families. We want to prioritise health and hospitals. I want to prioritise education, from childcare, early years schools right through and TAFE and universities. I want to prioritise action on climate change. I want to prioritise getting the energy bills down. I want to make sure that we get wages moving again in this country. And on International Women's Day I want to prioritise and say that for me every day is about achieving the equal treatment of women. So whether or not I'm lucky or not, I'm grateful for the support I receive. I'm grateful for the opportunity to put our case to the people. In terms of the government's internal matters - they just don't get it do they? Even today half of the Nationals don't want Barnaby Joyce, the other half do want him, none of them seem to want the government's energy policy. Mr Turnbull's having difficulty letting go and no one's explained to him what's happened, they're divided. So to that extent, I'm fortunate that I've got such a great team and I look forward to the next election and putting forward a plan for the betterment of this country.

JOURNALIST: Just briefly on climate change -

SHORTEN: Sorry - so just on climate change?

JOURNALIST: Just very quickly. Sarah Hanson-Young is going to be out this afternoon, she's going to say that if Labor is serious about climate change they would come out and say that exploration in the Bight should be banned. What would you say to that?

SHORTEN: I don't mind Sarah chasing a headline. But what I do think is that we'll be guided by - and what I know is that we're always guided by the science. We're guided by the science. You know, we're not a develop at all costs party, but we're not a party who's going to just react to a headline. We want - the science and evidence is what's going to guide us. And I understand the debate about the Bight. I think at the moment, the even more pressing issue is the future of the Murray-Darling Basin. And I would just encourage people who are concerned about the environment of Australia, by all means make sure that we’re - I mean, Labor created more marine parks than any other government in the history of Federation. And I say to people, if you want to protect the environment vote for a party who can form a government not a party of protest like the Greens. But I must come back to the Murray-Darling Basin. As you know this government has basically swept under the carpet the massive fish kills at the Menindee Lakes. What more will it take to wake up the Liberals around the country that they need to save our biggest river system, than the death of literally millions of fish, some of the largest fish kills ever. So Sarah, she's entitled to take a point of view, but for me it's about getting things done, and I think the Murray-Darling Basin is one of the stains on the environmental record of the current Coalition Government. Sorry someone had a question for Cressida?

JOURNALIST: I just wanted to ask Cressida, do you -

SHORTEN: She's over here.

JOURNALIST: Oh sorry.

SHORTEN: So many women!

JOURNALIST: Do you think you can win Sturt or (inaudible)?

CRESSIDA O'HANLAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR STURT: Well I'm certainly going to give it a good try. I'm going to get out there and meet as many people as I can, and work hard with the volunteer team that I've got. And the reason I'm running is because I want to see solid action on climate change, on job instability, on funding for health, hospitals, aged care - all the sorts policies that I've been speaking to in the community of Sturt. And I'm finding that members of the community of Sturt want action on those sorts of policies too.

JOURNALIST: Do you think your chances in Sturt are enhanced if they stand a man, if the Liberals preselect a man? O'HANLAN: We don't know who they're preselected yet.

JOURNALIST: It's looking in all likelihood that James Stephens given the moderates controlling that branch, that he'll stand. Do you feel as are your chances to win are enhanced by coming up against a man? O'HANLAN: Well look, I'm just going to work as hard as I can to try and meet as many people in the community of Sturt as I can, and let them know what our message is and what our plans are to combat things like climate change and job instability, low wages and those sorts of things.

JOURNALIST: In terms of climate change, that's obviously a big national issue, I mean what are the people in the eastern suburbs saying about climate change? O'HANLAN: Well, the people I'm speaking to are seriously worried about climate change. We've all got, you know the people I've spoken to have got, children or grandchildren and they're noticing that like you said in the Advertiser the other day, in the last 10 years alone days above 40 degrees have more than doubled. So that affects us being able to take our children to the beach, it affects us being able to let our children go outside and play in the garden and it affects us being able to meet friends in parks to have picnics. So it's already affecting our lives.

SHORTEN: You saw it from your farming time. O'HANLAN: Yeah, well when we were on the farm, we went through the millennium drought and I can remember right back in those days that the Coalition was sort of denying that climate change was even an issue. So it's been an issue for a long time and it's well past time for it to be addressed.

JOURNALIST: And just to confirm you live within the electorate as well? O’HANLAN: I live just on the boundary, but we are renting at the moment so we've been looking for a house.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, very last question on Malcolm Turnbull, well two actually.

SHORTEN: Sure.

JOURNALIST: Do you think he would have beaten you?

SHORTEN: Listen, Julie Bishop said that too, but we'll never know because in the case of Julie Bishop the blokes didn't want to give the loyal woman deputy a crack after she loyally served four Liberal leaders. We'll never know if Malcolm Turnbull could have won the next election. We still don't even know why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull. The one thing we do know, today's intervention from Malcolm Turnbull sends a very clear message to the Australian people - that Liberal Party, they still hate each other and they're not getting better.

JOURNALIST: And I've still got the second question. Given his supposed I guess, disloyalty you might say, towards the party overnight, he might be angling for a diplomatic post under a Shorten Government. Would you consider that?

SHORTEN: Listen, the Liberal Party said to Australians three years ago, vote Liberal because Malcolm Turnbull was our leader. Now the Liberal Party say they don't even like Malcolm Turnbull. How can you trust anything the Liberal Party says in an election when last time they said vote for Malcolm Turnbull and then they got rid of him. So you know, I think if some of the Liberals want to attack Mr Turnbull, I think the first thing they need to do is explain why they got rid of him. In terms of Mr Turnbull's future service. I have a view and it's not just about Mr Turnbull or Julie Bishop or about Julia Gillard or about previous you know, senior leaders. I think sometimes Australian political life is so toxic that somehow because you've played for one team or the other that therefore that rules you out from serving further roles in public life. I don't share that view. Whilst I'm not sure that everything that happens in American politics I would want to see imitated here, what they are quite respectful of is the Office of the President and so I am quite respectful of anyone who's served as Prime Minister of Australia or at the very senior ranks. Now, does that mean we will appoint them? No, I'm not saying that. But I think in Australia we need to see an end to the hyper-partisanship which I think really started with Mr Abbott, but it hasn't really dropped off. After the next election, if Labor's successful, what I intend to do is to sit down, if we win, with the then Opposition and say listen you might not agree on some of the things we're doing but what can we agree on and what can we get done? And if it comes to the South Road, or if it comes to action about the Murray-Darling Basin, or if it comes to getting wages moving, or the equal treatment of women, refunding and properly repairing the cuts to hospitals, if the Liberals want to work with me, well then I will work with them. But what I won't do is let the right wing of the Liberal Party hold this nation back. They've taken up six years of this nation's story that's long enough. Time's up. Thank you everybody.

GED KEARNEY, MEMBER FOR BATMAN: Good morning everybody, thanks for coming. I'm Ged Kearney, I'm the Federal Member for Batman soon to be called Cooper, and I'm here today with the Leader of the Opposition Bill Shorten at the Reservoir Level Crossing Removal; a great piece of infrastructure that the community absolutely loves, has created good steady jobs and will benefit the community here in my electorate. But we are here today talking to workers about a really pressing issue for Australian people and that is the stagnation of wages in this country. Everything else is going up; prices are going up, energy costs are going up, the household budgets are under pressure and we're seeing a situation where the national income is rising and profits are expanding, but people's wages are not, and that does put people under pressure in the economy. So I'm very pleased to say that we think this election will be fought on the issue of wages. It is a very important issue, everybody is feeling it from the workers around here in this seat, right across the country, and I'd like to introduce the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten to expand on Labor's policies.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Ged and I acknowledge the great work of the Level Crossing Removal Authority and all the people working to make Melbourne a much more liveable city. I'm here today though to talk about what is one of Australia's biggest problems. The problem is that everything's going up except people's wages. Wherever I travel in Australia people say that the cost of living is going up, the energy bills are going up, the patient rebate for Medicare has been frozen for years, the out-of-pocket costs of going to see a doctor or a specialist is going up and up, private health insurance is becoming a luxury item. So on one hand everything's going up, but on the other hand wages are stagnating. We've seen in the last 12 months alone that wages are moving at about two per cent, and if you took out public sector wages it would be under two per cent. So wages moving about two per cent in Australia in the last year, everything's going up, but corporate profits have gone up nearly 10 per cent. So some people in Australia are doing very well, thank you very much. It just doesn't happen to be the bulk of the Australian people, the millions of Australians who go to work every day as subcontractors, as small business people, as workers in this country. Labor believes that the next election within the next two and a half months will be a referendum on wages. The economy is not doing as well as it should. It's not doing as well as it should because that vice that Australian families are stuck in, the vice on one hand of cost of living going up, and on the other hand of wages stagnating, means that more Australians than ever are dipping into household savings to pay the fortnightly bills. It means that more Australians are living in part, on their credit card just for the day to day essentials. So Labor wants to see a minimum wage in Australia which is a living wage. People who work full time in Australia should earn enough money that it means that they're not living in poverty. $18.93 for an Australian adult working full-time - $18.93 for an Australian adult working full-time is not enough. We need to have a country where our minimum wage is a wage that you can live on. Now Labor's got some policies and plans to do that, but a core principle is that Australian adults doing full-time work should be able to earn enough money which means that they can actually not be living in poverty. We want to restore the penalty rates for people who have had them arbitrarily cut in retail and hospitality. We want to make sure that women in Australia are paid the same as men. We want to clamp down on dodgy labour hire and abuse of subcontracting arrangements which see subbies left holding the bill when the company directors don't pay them what they're owed, and they ride off into the sunset. We want to make sure that casuals in this country have a fair go and we want to have a minimum wage which is a living wage, and we want to clamp down on wages theft and the exploitation of temporary guest workers which undermines living conditions and wages for everyone in Australia. We're happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: On the living wage, the ACTU has previously said they’d like to see 60 per cent of the national median wage, so the living wage is pegged to that - is that something you would like to see or have you got a different policy?

SHORTEN: Well my policy on the minimum wage is that it should be a living wage. I start from a core principle, and I defy the government to disagree with me on this principle. No Australian adult should have a full-time job where their wage is not enough to keep them out of poverty. We should have a minimum wage which is a living wage. The cost of living has been going up. The reality is that for young people it's harder than it's ever been to be able to buy their first home. The reality is that energy prices are out of control because we've got a government who can't control energy prices because they hate renewable energy. We've got a government who's made such massive cuts to our health care system that for Australians, middle and working class Australians out- of- pocket costs for health care are just too expensive. In terms of the process to resolve a living wage, that should be done by the independent umpire the Fair Work Commission. But we need to have very clear guidelines which state that a minimum wage for an adult working full time should be sufficient to lift them out of poverty not keep them in poverty.

JOURNALIST: Will you announce a wages policy before the election. If so, when?

SHORTEN: We've announced a wages policy, we've been unveiling parts of it for the last 18 months. This government doesn't have a wages policy, I mean - sorry, let me rephrase that. if you're the Chairman of the ABC or the CEO of the ABC, they'll give you $1.5 million to go away, But for the rest of Australia, they don't have a wages policy. Some of the features of our wages policy; we want to restore the penalty rates which have been cut arbitrarily, that's going to help over 700,000 people. We want to see women who work in predominantly feminised industries - that's industries where women make up the vast bulk of the work force, we want to review their wages to see them get a lift, because historically we haven't valued women's work in the same way we value the work of Australian men. We want to clamp down on the treatment of subcontractors by dodgy directors, that'll help lift the wages for small businesses and and subcontractors. We want to clamp down on the abuse of labour hire, which is leading to a race to the bottom in the payment of people and their commissions. We want to reverse and tackle wages theft which has been an ongoing endemic problem in parts of Australian industry, where people are simply not getting paid even the minimums that they're meant to get paid. We want to make sure that there's less abuse of temporary guest labour and the use of dodgy visas to bring people in from overseas, exploit them and lower local wages and conditions. And today we're also saying that we want the minimum wage to be a living wage. This is a wages policy, and the reason why we need a wages policy is because everything is going up in Australia except people's wages and the economy is not firing. The government ran a massive scare campaign on Tuesday, then the Prime Minister ran away to Christmas Island on Wednesday to avoid facing the music. The reality is for Australians their medical costs are up, they're having to dip into household savings to make ends meet. I want to see an economy which is managed in the interests of working and middle class Australians not the top end of town.

JOURNALIST: On Christmas Island, have you been briefed on how it's going to work on the Medevac -

SHORTEN: The government - listen, we all know the government's making it up on the run. When it comes to keeping strong borders, Labor will keep strong borders and we'll have regional processing. But it is beyond a joke, that the Prime Minister of Australia flies to the furtherest part of what is technically Australia, to run a scare campaign. Do you know that photo opportunity which the Prime Minister took Australia on yesterday, cost $2000 a minute. I'm here today talking to workers in Australia, saying that I don't think that $18 per hour is enough for a full-time, job for an adult to be able to get by on. I'm focused on the workers, I'm focused on small business and subcontractors, I'm focused on tackling cost of living and getting things moving, this Prime Minister's focused on photo opportunities at $2000 a minute.

JOURNALIST: You're making the call that $18.60 isn't enough, but then you won't say what is enough to make a living.

SHORTEN: What I've done is I've explained to you the process. Wages should be in the first instance set by the independent umpire, the Fair Work Commission. I have made it very clear and I'm happy to repeat it because it's a very important concept, that we need a minimum wage, which means that for an adult working full time they're not stuck in poverty. We used to think that stuff happened in America, the idea that you had to have three jobs, that you couldn't - you had to rely on tips, that you wouldn't get health insurance. You know, we used to think that was what happened in America. But the reality is for more and more Australians they’re in part time work, they're trapped in labour hire arrangements, and they're not getting paid properly and what we're seeing now is something which I never thought I'd see in my lifetime; Australian adults working full time, in some cases holding down two or three jobs and they're still barely coasting around the poverty range. That's not the Australia we want our kids to grow up in. This government is chronically incapable of a wages policy. They just say leave it to the market, they don't understand that there's something wrong when corporate profits are up 10 per cent and wages are only up two per cent. This government has no plan. Even when it comes to taxes, Labor has got better, bigger tax refunds for workers up to $120,000 in Australia which is about 10 million people. We're proposing that for a family you know, a married couple perhaps mum working in aged care earning $60,000, dad might be working as a construction labourer earning $90,000 a year, under Labor's Fair a better tax plan this couple will get nearly $2000 back in tax refund every year. But this Federal Government, no plan for wages, no plan for energy prices, no plan for health costs and no plan for better, fairer and bigger tax cuts for Australian workers.

JOURNALIST: On energy policy, six Nationals MPs are demanding action from Michael McCormack to put the government's energy policy back on the agenda. What do you make of this in-fighting?

SHORTEN: There they go again, the Coalition fighting each other. You know, I just think that's what the Coalition exists to do, every morning they get out of bed and work out how can they fight each other. It would almost be a joke except that energy prices are absolutely crippling Australian business and Australian household budgets. We have an energy crisis problem, we have a wages problem, we have a health costs problem and this government can only fight themselves. For the record it's worth noting the Coalition have had 11 energy policies. I mean, they've had three Prime Ministers, five Defence Ministers, 11 energy policies and 22 reshuffles. This is a government that lives to fight each other. They're not interested in every day Australian families. So more division, more chaos and the consequence of the government having another fight on energy policies, is that investors won't invest in new renewable energy, in new sources of energy. And when there's not investment in new energy that just means that the price of existing energy goes up and up, and Australian households and small businesses cop it in the neck from a delinquent, distracted and divided government who just aren't interested in the needs of working and middle class people.
JOURNALIST: If there's a vote on this issue in Budget week, what are the changes you would like to see?

SHORTEN: Listen, trying to pick what this government's next energy policy is, you've got more chance of picking the Melbourne Cup and they haven't even announced the runners. There's no point in getting attached to the government's energy policy because by the time you get to know its name and how it works, someone in the government will have changed it. Really, this is a chaotic government. If you are an Australian who wants to see action on climate change, if you are an Australian who wants to see lower energy prices for business or families give up on the government, because they've given up on you. They're too busy fighting each other. This government is chronically paralysed and will for as long as it remains in government, be incapable of taking one energy policy and putting it to the people.

JOURNALIST: Can Labor unseat Ministers like Greg Hunt and Josh Frydenberg?

SHORTEN: The voters will be the only ones who can unseat sitting Ministers. The problem for the Health Minister is he's basically become a - he's disappeared, because he knows that his ruthless push to get himself the Deputy Prime Minister's job meant that he had to support Peter Dutton, arguably Australia's most unpopular politician for good reason. You know this, the Member for Flinders divided his government, tore down Malcolm Turnbull, helped force Julie Bishop to resign. So no doubt the people in Flinders are saying what are you on about.

JOURNALIST: Do you think there could be a repeat of the state results federally here in Victoria?.
SHORTEN: The outcome of the election will be decided by the Australian people. But what I do know is that wherever I travel in Australia, I get a couple of common sentiments, doesn't matter if it's the tip of Cape York to the bottom of Tasmania, from around Sydney Harbour all the way to the beaches of Perth. What I hear from the Australian people is this. They say Bill we’re sick of the instability. We're sick of politicians fighting each other about themselves and not concentrating on us. You know, I get lifelong Liberals saying they don't agree with everything Labor is saying, but they do acknowledge that Labor is united, that we're stable and we're being upfront with the people putting the full range of our views. What Australian people want out of Australian politics is for one Prime Minister to be there for three years, to say what you're going to do and do what you say, and to make sure that we focus on the people. The other issue I hear wherever I travel is, what are you going to do about the fact that everything's going up except our wages? Labor's got better tax cuts, better plans to reverse the cuts to hospitals and schools, a fairer deal for Australians with better tax cuts for 10 million workers, and we're going to take real action on energy and renewable energy and climate -something this government just can't do.

JOURNALIST: The Greens are threatening to launch the biggest protests Australia's ever seen if the Morrison Government signs off on two new coal-fired power plants in New South Wales. What do you make of the plan?

SHORTEN: I'd say to the Greens, don't book your busses. What we see is that most investors aren't interested in spending a whole lot of money on new coal-fired power station without massive taxpayer subsidies. A government I lead is not going to invest taxpayer money in uncommercial, unenvironmental new coal-fired power stations.

JOURNLAIST: Just back on Christmas Island, the government yesterday said that any new arrivals will go to Christmas Island for processing and then on to Nauru. Is that a policy that you would continue in government?

SHORTEN: The government just want to talk about this because they haven't got a wages policy, I’m not going to fall for that trick. Under Labor - strong borders, we will properly make sure that our Defence Force and Border Force are fully resourced, unlike the current government's actions. But we all know why the government is talking about this issue. We know why they're talking about this issue, it's because they haven't got a wages policy, they don't have an energy policy, they don't have a climate policy, they don't have a Medicare policy, and they don't even like each other.

JOURNALIST: Why have you decided today to come to a State Government funded project to announce what you want to do as Prime Minister, if you were elected?

SHORTEN: The workers of Australia can work for state projects, they can work for the private sector, they can work for the federal government. But what I'm saying to all Australian workers and contractors and small businesses is that I will be, I will lead a government for all Australians. I'll work with business, I'll work with unions, I'll work with workers, I'll work with farmers, but I won't work for any particular section of Australia. What we need to do in this country is start working together. The current government's always telling you why you shouldn't like someone, why you have got to be afraid of a minority, why you've got to be fearful about you know, agreeing with other people's points of view. I have a different view about how Australia works. When Australia is working together, when we're co-operating, when we compromising, when we're listening to all points of view, that generally produces a better outcome. Make no mistake I have got very clear views and values about what we should do. I have a view that when Australians are getting a fair go all round, when we're properly funding our schools and hospitals, when we're making sure that we're driving down - making sure that we're driving down pressure on cost of living , when we've got good wages, that's good. But how we do these things, I'm prepared to listen to the point of view of workers of small businesses, of farmers, of pensioners, of people in business. This country works best when we work together. This current government can't even work with themselves. It's time for a change. Thanks everybody.

PHIL COOREY, AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW: Thanks for your speech Mr Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Phil.

COOREY: Before we get into the detail of it, if I could start a bit generally on the economy. I think we’ve seen in the last few days competing economic narratives. Both yourself and the Prime Minister coming at it from different angles. I had a conversation about a year ago with Kevin Rudd, your predecessor times two, and he said one of the difficulties a Labor Opposition always faces close to an election is a reluctance amongst voters to hand the economy to Labor, especially a recovering one or a strong one. He encountered that problem in 2007, and he said that's why he had to make those answers about being an economic conservative and so forth. He said it's always - the polls would always close on you just because of that inherent reluctance. How do you, mindful of what you've just told us, how do you sort of combat that sentiment? We heard yesterday the Prime Minister waving the recession word around, leaving that hanging, obviously trying to reinforce that negative perception. How do you get around that?

SHORTEN: Well, I wouldn't have predicted when I became Leader of the Opposition about 1,970 days ago – but who's counting, that stability would be such a plus for Labor. So we live in different times I think, to perhaps some of the previous electoral cycles. The government is on their third Prime Minister, they're on their 11th energy policy, their fifth Defence Minister. You know, one comment I got over summer wherever I went is I had people come to me and say I've never thought about voting Labor before. Don't agree with everything you're saying. But just promise us you'll be stable. So the first observation I'd make Phil is that there is a hunger for stability that is as intense as any time as I've seen. And whatever one thinks about every policy Labor has, no one can fairly say that we are not the stable proposition in Australian politics. And the second point I make is that this government is a desperate government. Their shrillness and desperation is almost measurable in decibels. You know, a frolic to Christmas Island - what a waste of money.  We find out they've cut the Border Force funding, then you've got a marketing campaign. The point about it is it's desperate stuff because the economy is right here. As someone once said "it's the economy, stupid." Energy prices are going up and up and this government is paralysed on climate. And I don't think that's too harsh an analysis. Health costs, out of pockets - since this government's been in with the Medicare Patient Rebate freeze, that's transferred the cost - $3 billion dollars of the cost of the health system into out of pockets and to doctors. So wages growth is stalled. The housing market - they want to talk about us, the housing market is very patchy now under the current government, but the single thing which is the biggest challenge - wages policy, the government doesn't talk about.

COOREY: I was going to ask you about it, because the Prime Minister made the point yesterday, his line is you have to grow the economy to pay for all these things, health and so forth, all the issues that you hold dear. What's your basic plan for growing the economy? Is it this inclusive growth strategy that Labor has or something a bit more basic?

SHORTEN: It's a fair go for all. Invest in education. Do you know, we've got an exciting plan which will put Australia back at the top of the league table of countries in early years education? How many people here know that we're spending more on tax loopholes than we are on universal access to kindergarten for three and four year olds? Why are we the country with the most unusual dividend franking arrangements, but we don't want to be the country which is best in the world for educating our three and four year olds? It's about priorities isn't it. And so you know, you talk about economic plan - education, it's property funding out public schools. The Federal Government's put money after pressure from us into Catholic schools, but there's a $14 billion cut in funding to government schools over the next 10 years, despite what they promised when they got elected. So university and TAFE I mentioned - so one strand of a fair go has to be education, education, education. You give people the tools to better themselves in life, they'll grab it with both hands. Of course the other thing has to be physical infrastructure. The politics of infrastructure in this country is deeply frustrating. The money's there to invest, the liquidity is there, but we've got a blockage in deals because too much of the decision making is short term. If I become Prime Minister in my first week, I'll write to whoever's in charge of the Opposition - that could be anyone's guess. The point about it is that we're going to invite them to nominate directors, give us a shortlist, to go onto Infrastructure Australia. See, the government loves to bag having a bit of a union background, but one thing I did learn is you must negotiate. So I want to involve the Opposition in political decision making. I don't mean ringing me up on the morning they've leaked a story about the new Chair of the ABC - that's not consultation, that's patronising. But the real issue is that on infrastructure - and business, surely this is music to businesses' ears. Let's get the best and brightest in a room on the Infrastructure Australia Board and make long term decisions and submit their logic publicly. So infrastructure, education, but you’ve got to have a wages policy, you've got to have a climate policy, you've got to have an energy policy. See the beauty of renewable energy is that it is becoming the cheapest form of energy in the country. So what we can do is help put downward pressure on individuals' and businesses' energy prices and at the same time take long term action on climate. So infrastructure, energy, education and then of course you need to have a wages policy because you need to develop confidence and I articulated some of that in my speech.

COOREY: Could I ask you about that - on wages, because there was a bit of interest in this room. One of the criticisms of business is the money has to come from somewhere. You talked about the minimum wage being inadequate, not a living wage. Is a living wage still on the table as part of Labor policy and also you didn't mention in terms of things you would do, the reintroduction of industry wide bargaining in low paid sectors which came up in Labor's National Conference last year. Are those two ideas still potential Labor policy position?

SHORTEN: Well, the first thing is do we agree wages are too low in this country? See, if you don't think that wages are too low in this country, then wages growth doesn't matter. Nothing else I say really matters. You can - that's a start. But I actually think wages growth is too low - it's unhelpfully low. And what that means is that there's not enough money circulating through the economy and people are either not spending, or they're dipping into savings which is an unhealthy state of affairs. So we've said - and I'll go to your two specifics at the end, we said we want to restore the penalty rates. When you cut penalty rates arbitrarily, it's not people on $200,000 you're cutting, it's people on $40,000 and $50,000. And if they don't have the money - they're not saving that, they're not buying Swiss gold bullion, they spend it in the High Street. So when you cut penalty rates you cut the volume and the velocity of cash in the economy, and that actually then stifles and hurts the whole business chain. The more economic activity, as you've got wages moving, the more you create volume of economic activity. So some of the specific measures, restore the penalty rates. There's nothing wrong with paying women in feminised industries better. We let our kids go to pre-school - the first relationships they have with adults outside the family unit is with these early years educators, and we pay these people in child care terrible wages. So I think there's a whole section of the economy and feminised industries, equal pay, a lot more can be done there. In terms of the minimum wage, it's about $18.93 for an adult. I don't know how many of you are living on $18.93 an hour. If you don't want to live on it, why do we expect everyone else to live on it?

COOREY: So we could be looking at a living wage?

SHORTEN:  I think that we now need to - the minimum wage concept set by - it came in as a principle before we had mobile phones, before we charged for water, the internet hadn't been invented. So there's living cost and energy prices. Australians are still confounded by this government. We should be an energy superpower. We've got gas, we've got coal to export, we've got renewables - yet somehow we sort of go into the gymnasium of economics very fit and we come out this sort of puny unit at the end of it. The politicians are letting down our energy system. So we've got energy price problems and that doesn’t help with the minimum wage. In terms of bargaining, the bargaining system is broken. There's a lot of great companies, and some of them are represented here. You're bargaining with your workers, but you've got new entrants into the industry who can just go along and pay the award.  You've done the right thing, you've done six or seven rounds of bargaining, and the problem is you're now at a competitive disadvantage because employers can just opt out of the bargaining system and say to their employees "cut your wages or we'll take you back to the award." There is a problem.

COOREY: Okay, we've only got a minute to go, so I'll take that as it’s on the table.

SHORTEN: I didn't mean to - sorry if I was ambiguous about that.

COOREY: No that's okay. Just very quickly, two things of interest to our audience. You've outlined your carbon emissions policy for the energy sector, you’ve flagged a baseline and credit scheme for heavy manufacturing (inaudible) will we see the details of that before the election?

SHORTEN: Yes. We will do more on our climate policy before the election.

COOREY: Just also all your tax changes, negative gearing, CGT, franking credits etc. The election timing is going to be very tight in terms of the start of next financial year, should you win the election there'd be a fairly quick turnaround to try to get the Parliament back and actually legislate anything.

SHORTEN: It depends on when we introduce it Chris and I -

COOREY: That's what I'm wondering.

SHORTEN: Chris and I will have more to say about the timing of that and in plenty of time before the election, absolutely.

COOREY: So investors will know the start dates of those policies?

SHORTEN: We will provide that certainty. Although you mentioned negative gearing, how embarrassing for the government that their Treasury Department has been out in some of the newspapers today. The government went back and said so we want to fact check that Labor's policy will, you know wreck housing prices. Treasury came back and said you can't say that, that's not right. Anyway, can I just say to you, the people of Australia want good policy debate, we'll give you that. I get that there's different points of view, I get that what I've said to you today, some of you will not agree with everything I said, and I don't expect you to. But what I can promise you as representatives of business, people interested in the future of this nation, I've got a talented team, they're going to be the same team before the election as after the election too. I have a stable team, and I have a united team. And what I've said today is we've got to renovate our wages system. But the whole message I put to you is the way in which I will be a Prime Minister if I am elected. I want to work with you. I won't work for any particular section of the economy or the society, but I will work with you and we will get the best ideas on the table. And we're treating the electorate respect by putting a lot of our policies out upfront. I promise you a better level of political discourse in this country than the toxic, turgid, fear mongering and desperation which we're currently seeing in the nation. Thank you very much.

COOREY: Okay thanks Bill.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PREVENTION OF FAMILY VIOLENCE: Well good morning everyone and thank you for coming. I'm joined by many of my colleagues today, including the Leader Bill Shorten, the Deputy Leader Tanya Plibersek, Clare O'Neil, and Jenny McAllister, and Jenny from Domestic Violence Victoria who's going to say something. Today's announcement is a very important one. To leave a violent situation for women and children takes bravery, it takes sometimes many years, but it also takes practical help as well, and that's what we're announcing today. We're announcing $60 million from the Banking Fairness Fund, and 20,000 packages of flexible support packages for women and their children leaving domestic violence. These support packages are incredibly important and they are a practical way to support women and their children who have made the very brave decision to leave a violent situation. We have seen how important and how successful these packages have been in Victoria and we have looked at that model. There is absolute accountability, there is the involvement of service providers, there is the involvement of state governments. This announcement today is part of Labor's package for addressing the great scourge in this country of domestic and family violence. When a woman and her children decide to leave a situation, when they finally have that opportunity, you need more than bravery - you need practical assistance and many women and children stay in violent situations because they simply do not have the financial resources to be able to leave. We have heard stories today of women turning up here in Victoria with five dollars in their bank account and the clothes on their back. And this flexible support packages announcement will give capacity for women to be able to do very practical things, very practical things like a rental bond, very practical things like transport, very practical things like school fees and school uniforms. Incredibly practical things like sporting equipment, very practical things like utility bills and security for houses if women decide that they will stay. These are the things that make it a reality for many women and their children to leave violent situations. These packages will be up to $10,000 each and we know from the Victorian experiences, most packages are around $3,000. We believe that we can offer 20,000 packages over the next four years. That means 20,000 families will be safe and that is a very very important initiative and very welcome I know by the sector. Labor was work with states to implement this. Will work with service providers. This support will be available to all people across the sector no matter who they are. It will also make sure that we include Family Violence Prevention Legal Services for Aboriginal women as well. The packages will be determined with social workers and domestic violence workers and the individuals and families involved. There will be goals and outcomes attached because we are helping people to leave violent situations and it is a very very significant and practical way to do that. I'm going to ask the Leader Bill Shorten to make some comments as well, but when you think about a woman making the decision with her children to leave a violent situation, she needs help with a working car. She needs help to house her family pets. She needs help for school gear. She needs help for utility bills. She needs help for rental bonds and she needs help for making her home secure. This is an incredibly important part of Labor's commitment to supporting people who are in difficult circumstances and also addressing the great scourge of family violence in Australia.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Linda. Good morning everybody. I'd like to address my remarks to those Australians, to Australian women, who are currently trapped in abusive and violent relationships. Today the Labor Party is saying that we want to provide Flexible Support Packages. We want to provide you with the ability to say that you no longer have to be trapped in an intolerable situation because of financial and economic reasons. The reality is that violence against women in the family context is happening right now. The truth is that every two minutes, on average, somewhere in Australia the police will be called to a domestic violence situation. That's about 657 times a day that Australian women are seeking help to escape a violent relationship. Last October in 2018, in a period of 27 days, 11 women were killed by partners or ex-partners who once said they love them. We have an epidemic of family violence in this country. We're better at talking about it than we ever used to be. We've only really started to deal with it. Once upon a time people would turn up the television or pull the curtains across not to hear what was happening next door. More and more Australians are not turning their back on their fellow Australians who are the victims of violence. But we've got to do far more, and it won't be quick or overnight that we can engineer these changes. Even the very expression 'family violence' sort of creates a notion that it's just a family matter - it's not, it's violence - there's not first class violence and second class violence, there's just violence. So what we need to do is be better at helping women escape abusive relationships. Women should not be remaining in intolerable situations of danger to their physical or emotional and mental health just because they don't know where to go and because they are worried about who's going to pay the rent, who is going to pay the school fees, who's going to pay the cost of the utilities, who's going to pay for the very things which are trapping women in violent, abusive relationships. So what Labor's announcing today is that we will fund 20,000 Flexible Support Packages. These are modest packages - no woman who gets one has won the lotto getting one of these packages. The fact of the matter is we're allowing up to $10,000, the average claimed by women escaping violence is about $3,000, so it's not very much to free a mother and kids from a violent relationship. But what we've seen in Victoria is an excellent experience. So I say to women who are in abusive and violent and exploitative relationships you can actually draw a line under the sand, there are places to go. After the next election if Labor's elected, we'll be rolling out these support packages. And I'm pleased to say that we can fund these support packages because we've set up a Bank Fairness Fund. What we want to do is make sure the banks contribute towards the safety net in the community. Nothing could be more fundamental a safety-net than ensuring that women and kids are safe. So what we're able to do is that the banks can help assist pay for these packages and what it means is that for women and kids tonight who are waiting at home, who might have a spouse who comes home who is either drunk or violent, aggressive, this does not have to be the way things have to be in the future. So there is support available now and if Labor gets elected, there'll be these Flexible Support Packages. I'd like to invite Clare O'Neil, one of our financial spokespeople, to talk a bit more about how we're funding the Bank Fairness Fund and how we're going to support women escaping violence. We want women to be able to recover. We want women to be able to be safe and we want them to work on their wellbeing. I'll hand over to Claire next.

CLARE O'NEIL, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:  Thanks Bill. Australians do a lot for our big banks. Almost everyone watching at home right now is probably a customer of a big bank and all of the Australian people support the big banks through what is an implicit guarantee that they are too big to fail. What we are saying to the big banks today is that we want you to do more to give back to the Australian community. Now we agitated for two years for a Banking Royal Commission. Scott Morrison voted against it 26 times. And for those two years, while Labor was asking for a Royal Commission into the big banks, Scott Morrison was trying to give them $17 billion in a tax cut. Labor is going to take a very different approach. The Banking Royal Commission gives us a genuine, once in a generation opportunity to rebalance financial services in this country back in favour of the consumer and Labor is going to take it. The Banking Fairness Fund is a $640 million expression of that thought. It is $640 million that we'll levy on the big banks that are on the ASX 100 and all of those dollars will be reinvested back into services that support everyday Australians. We are making a very important announcement today that Linda's talked about, $60 million for women and their children who are fleeing violent relationships. Now, I am sure there will be some out there who say, what has it got to do with the banks? Why should the banks be funding this sort of service? Well, what we say  to those people is this, last year the big four banks in this country made $30 billion in profit alone. For every woman, for every of the 1,000 women who will be helped by these packages, that small amount of money that she will get will be life changing for her. For the bank, it will be merely a rounding error. This is about making sure the banks give back to us - and that is the sort of attitude you'll see from a Shorten Labor government. I want to now introduce Jenny Jackson, who is the CEO of EDVOS. They get a 1,000 referrals a month from women who are fleeing violent relationships. Thanks, Jenny.

JENNY JACKSON, CEO OF EDVOS: On behalf of EDVOS, I'd like to say that we are incredibly excited to hear about the flexible support packages. The reality is that they simply are life-changing. Whether it's preventing homelessness by enabling a woman to move into new accommodation with her children, whether it's fixing the car so that she can get her kids to school in the morning or perhaps, school uniforms or school books so that the children aren't removed from school and so that they continue their education. It's incredibly exciting and these packages are incredibly important. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Jenny. Before we take questions on this and other initiatives, I just want to express my solidarity with Victorians who've encountered the last weekend of shocking bushfires. Now, at least nine properties have been destroyed which is devastating for those families. There's 19 different bushfires. The Bunyip fire has already burnt 12,000 hectares, the Licola fire 15,000 hectares so far. There's nearly 2,000 volunteer firefighters and emergency services personnel. It has been a very difficult weekend for Victorians, in particular the people who live in west Gippsland and Gippsland more generally and our thoughts are with them. This will be a very difficult time. Happy to take questions on the great announcement today.

JOURNALIST: Are there any other components of the Victorian Government's Royal Commission into Family Violence that you'd be looking at adopting?

SHORTEN: There have been a range. What I'll do is get Linda and Tanya, who has been giving a lot of the leadership here in terms of tackling family violence to talk about our other initiatives.

BURNEY: There are a number of other initiatives that we've already announced, including a program that gives capacity for women to stay at home and make their home safe. We've already announced a very significant amount of money to support legal services in the context of women seeking legal redress and we're also clearly looking very carefully at what Victoria is doing - and also what other states and territories are doing. We're developing a 10-year action plan on this so it takes up the point that Jenny has made - that this is about generational approaches to the issue of family violence. This issue is not about electoral cycles and we're about making sure that these flexible support packages and a 10-year action plan goes over a whole decade. We're also making sure that this issue is put back on the national agenda. Bill and Tanya and our leadership team have made an enormous commitment to this and the issue of family violence will be back clearly on the COAG agenda.

JOURNALIST: On another matter then, would you be looking at following the Coalition's lead and using Kyoto credits towards the Paris agreement?

SHORTEN: On the specific question, we're taking advice on that. I think the broader issue though is that this is a government under whom carbon emission pollution is going up and up and up. We welcome an election fought on climate change. The problem is for the last six years, we have had a government who can't agree on what they should do about climate change and the losers are going to be future generations of Australians. The Government record on not taking action on climate change: they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull because he wanted to. Energy prices have gone up for households and for businesses and carbon pollution emissions have gone up. This Government can't be trusted on climate change.

JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, you have taken advice or you'll be - ?

SHORTEN: We are taking advice now.

JOURNALIST: You have received it?

SHORTEN: We're taking it, we're in the process of it.

JOURNALIST: Alright. Is your feeling though that this is exploiting a loophole?

SHORTEN: It is technically possible what they're doing, but really, what we all suspect is this government is relying on a technical loophole to do the heavy lifting because they don't have any other climate change policies. So what they are doing may be technically possible to do but practically, it shouldn't be used as an excuse to avoid real action on climate change. Under the Liberals in Canberra, under the Liberal National Government in Canberra, emissions are going up. That's the fact. Under this government, electricity and gas prices are going up. That's just a fact. Under Labor, we want to by 2030 get to 50 per cent renewables in our energy mix , we want to give Australian households the opportunity to get their power bills down and do something meaningful on climate change, that's why we're going to encourage the rollout of solar batteries. Australian households, already two million, have solar rooftop. What we want to do is get people to be able to capture that benefit by being able to get batteries installed so they can access that energy all the time. The Australian people are so far in front of the Government in Canberra when it comes to climate change, it is beyond a joke.

JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of women in cabinet, Scott Morrison says he will have seven women in cabinet if he wins the election. Is it good enough?

SHORTEN: I think the Liberal Party has got a problem with promoting women, full stop. You can only draw that conclusion when you realise they have 58 members of the House of Representatives, the Liberals, and there are 11 women but four are not re-standing. They have either been dumped by their party or they're standing down. Of those four who are quitting, two of them have been replaced by blokes. One of them said the party has a problem with women and Julie Bishop, I notice, who said that she could have been a contender and done well if she was leader of the Liberal Party is now being attacked by her party again today. But I might get Tanya to talk further about the substantive issues.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much, Bill. And is it any wonder that Julie Bishop thinks there is no future for her in the Liberal Party. This is a party where a quarter of its female members have said that the party has a problem with bullying and intimidation within the parliamentary party. And Scott Morrison, as Prime Minister, has just refused to listen to those women MPs that have called out the culture in the Liberal Party. We've got Julie Bishop saying that she could have been leader but her party wouldn't hack it. I think if you look at - the first thing to say about the leadership is they still haven't explained why Malcolm Turnbull isn't the leader. But if you look at alternative leaders beside Malcolm Turnbull, Julie Bishop consistently rated above the blokes but the blokes couldn't bring themselves to vote for Julie Bishop. Again, that shows that they have got a woman problem. The real problem is not just the fact that their parliamentary party is less than a quarter female when the Labor Party's almost half female, their problem is in the policies that they're adopting. They show how profoundly out of touch they are with Australian women when they do things like cut penalty rates that so many Australian women rely on to make ends meet. When they change the child care policy to make a quarter of families worse off. When they five times try and reduce paid parental leave. When they undermine the very legal services that help victims of violence escape violent relationships. When they cut funding for emergency accommodation for victims of domestic violence. They show how out of touch they are, out of the mouths of their own women MPs - not forgetting Kelly O'Dwyer their most senior front bencher until recently said that the Liberal Party is perceived as anti-women and Julie Bishop actually said that some of the bullying behaviour might be potentially illegal. I mean that's the scale we're talking about within the parliamentary Liberal Party. They show how profoundly out of touch they are with their own Parliamentary Party and the way it conducts itself but most particularly, they show how profoundly out of touch they are with modern Australian women by their policies. The policies they adopt undermine Australian women, undermine their economic security and independence.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, just on that do you agree with her statement though that she would have been more competitive at this election than Scott Morrison?

PLIBERSEK: Well, Julie Bishop consistently rated higher than either Peter Dutton or Scott Morrison as potential alternative leaders but Malcolm Turnbull was doing better than all of them and the mystery still stands, why did the Liberal Party get rid of Malcolm Turnbull?

JOURNALIST: So just still on that, if Labor wins the election will you have seven or more women in your Cabinet?

SHORTEN: We haven't finalised our line-up. Who the Ministry will be is ultimately decided by the Parliamentary Party, but I would be amazed if we didn't have more women in the Cabinet and in the Ministry and indeed the Parliament because we are already at 46 percent. My choices and options as you can see even by today's press conference are so much more than the government.

JOURNALIST: Should there be a minimum number as the new norm now in every Cabinet?

SHORTEN: We do have rules of thumb and I expect that we will have very high representation but the best way to ensure that we have more women in positions of power in Australia is to vote Labor at the next election because we are running more women candidates, we've already got more women MPs and I have got an absolutely outstanding front bench and senior leadership team with Tanya and Penny.

JOURNALISTS: Just on the diplomatic posts issue, have you drawn up a hit list of Liberal political appointees?

SHORTEN: The only people drawing up the list of Liberal appointees is the current government. This government is out of control. They are like a kid in the lolly shop with no governors on their own behaviour. This is a government who has never seen a job they don't want to fill a job with a Liberal hack. Let me use, for example the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, there's about 365 people serve on this tribunal, it is very important it actually makes decisions. Fifty-five of them are Liberal hacks, they've either been Liberal MPs, or failed Liberal candidates or ex-Liberal staffers, this government is out of control. Liberals rail against big government but they have not seen a government position they haven't sought to fill with a crony or a hack. This government is out of control, I think it is a disgrace. The sooner we can have a National Anti-Corruption Commission the better because the Liberals view being in power is their sort of, natural right and I think they think because they don't earn what some of their rich mates in the private sector earn that they can supplement their wages by picking their mates and putting them in positions of influence. This is a crony government, run for the cronies, by the cronies, on behalf of the cronies, they are out of control.

JOURNALIST: Just on the diplomatic appointees though, Marise Payne pointed out that Labor Governments have previously made political appointments to diplomatic appointments to diplomatic posts, do you think you are applying a double standard?
SHORTEN: Listen, I think poor old Marise Payne, the government wheel her out to defend the indefensible don't they? I guess she is the Minister for Defence. The point about it is when Labor was is in we would appoint ex-conservative politicians and Labor politicians. When the Liberals are in they don't make that mistake, they just appoint their own. I mean you can't see a major capital in the world where you can't run into an ex Liberal politician who is getting a pension, getting paid by the government to represent Australia overseas and probably teeing up a contract, who knows?

JOURNALIST: What did you make of the reports on the contract awarded for the (inaudible) immigration centre?

SHORTEN: This government really has to explain what's going on with the allocation of its Department of Home Affairs contracts, Paladin is an ongoing set of rolling scandals. Most Australians, you can't get a bank loan in this country if you just live in a beach shack normally but that's acceptable if you're applying for a Liberal government contract then you get - you can register your office at a beach shack in Kangaroo Island and you get a $423 million contract, as you do. This is a government where the Treasurer of the Liberal Party runs a big travel company, HelloWorld and they get contracts. This is a government which looks after themselves. They talk about themselves. They've run out of governing. They're running out of time and they're running out of office.

JOURNALIST: If Labor wins the election, do you have plans for who will be the Defence and Home Affairs Minister?

SHORTEN: Yes, we will certainly be filling both portfolios if we win the election but I notice the Government's trying to make an issue about demanding Labor name a particular Minister in a particular spot now. I mean, I would have thought the one issue that this beleaguered strife-prone Prime Minister wouldn't have gone to is the issue of ministerial stability. This Government - this current Prime Minister can't guarantee from one week to the next who will be in the Cabinet. They can't work out who will be their team at the election because they don't even know who else is going to drop out of their team. Did you know that under the Liberals they've had 22 reshuffles since they got elected. This is a revolving door Government, It is not worth getting to know who the Minister is because as soon as you form an emotional attachment, they will be gone. This Government is divided beyond all means of any semblance of being taken seriously on ministerial stability.

JOURNALIST: Does Labor definitely plan to keep the Home Affairs Minister portfolio?

SHORTEN: Yes, we do. We will do the same as the Government, the Government said that they would review the efficiency of it next term. We will, but we will certainly keep a Home Affairs Ministry, I can also say that if you look at my front bench, other than I think Senator Cameron, all of my colleagues have said they intend to run for election - that is the difference. Labor Ministers, Labor Shadow Ministers are hungry to see what they can do for the people of Australia. Liberal Ministers are just hungry to work out what sort of package they can get on the way out the door.

JOURNALIST: Does Labor support the Indonesian Free Trade Agreement? Will you be passing it without amendments?

SHORTEN: Well, let's just do a little bit of history here, it was Labor who got the Indonesian Free Trade Agreement negotiations started. It is a Labor project, so I feel very positive about it from what we've seen. We'll have to study the details as you always do. We want to make sure that Australian jobs are prioritised but we are very positive, from what we have seen so far.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Indonesian Australian Trade Deal, will you support it? Morrison says Labor is the only thing standing in its way?

SHORTEN: This man just blames Labor for everything. First of all, we haven't seen the detail but Labor started the process we are positively disposed towards it, no question. I have said that on Friday. So I think Mr Morrison should spend less time worrying about Labor on trade and more time worrying about the unity of his team.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any particular concerns that certain issues around it?

SHORTEN: We always want to make sure that Australians are getting jobs out of it, not being displaced by it. We make no apology for wanting to see Australian workers get jobs in Australia. But having said that trade with Indonesia is fundamentally important. It has been a neglected part of our foreign policy, 18,000 Australian companies trade with New Zealand, only 2,000 with Indonesia. Indonesia is much bigger. We are supportive of the live cattle trade to Indonesia and so obviously if this trade agreement can be made to work for Australia, it is in the national interest. Absolutely, we think that is a good thing.

JOURNALIST: So if it includes provisions which allow companies to sue Australia over investment disputes, will you then seek to block ratification.

SHORTEN: I am not going to start second-guessing the detail of arrangements. I think what we want to do is look at the net benefit of the agreement and that's what we will do and that is what we will study. Labor, when it was in office, did the Malaysian Free Trade Agreement, Chile and ASEAN when it was in office. When it came to the Korean trade agreement signed by Tony Abbott or the Japanese trade agreement signed by Tony Abbott, we supported it. We make no apology though that we always want to make sure that Australian trade qualifications are being recognised, that Australians are getting first priority. That Australian companies are not unduly subjected to our capricious legal claims elsewhere. But having said that, we're positive about what we see. Mr Morrison knows that, he is just trying to create an argument where one doesn't exist. Thanks.

JOURNALIST: Any union concerns, particularly about it?

SHORTEN: Unions are entitled to have their view on matters but I will look at the total national interest. Thanks everybody.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well good morning everybody and welcome. It's great to be here with Linda Burney, but also with advocates who have been pushing for a Royal Commission into the neglect and abuse of people living with disability. Some of the people will speak of their personal experiences - they're parents, they're advocates, they understand what happens. There is no doubt in my mind that the case for a Royal Commission into preventing abuse and neglect and violence against Australians living with disability, is tremendously overdue. Labor called for this Royal Commission on May 26th 2017. Now this country has made some progress on issues of disability. We now have a National Disability Insurance Scheme for example. But there is unfinished business to ensure that people with disability and their families and carers get an equal go in this country. But there is no more unexamined corner of the life of Australia, than the abuse and violence experienced by people with disability. This country has had report after report after report. We know that there are people living with disabilities who are forcibly restrained, as we speak right now. We sadly can predict, without any fear of contradiction that there will be people with disability who have been abused and neglected, the victims of violence even in the last 24 hours, even from when the government rejected a Royal Commission on Thursday, through to this Saturday morning. Linda is going to speak briefly after me, and then we'll hear, if people are willing to talk about some of their stories. But you measure the worth of a society not just by how rich it is, or how many gold medals it can win at the Olympics. You measure the worth of our society by the circumstances in which our least advantaged live. A person, an Australian living with a disability shouldn't be defined by their disability. A disability is just another fact of life, it's part of who you are as a human being. It's the way that everyone else responds to that disability is what defines us. There is abuse and neglect and violence going on against people with disability. I sincerely hope that the government reverses it's position that it's held for the best part of two years, against a Royal Commission. I want them to support it. I hope that the government realises the mistake they made on Thursday by voting against a Royal Commission in the Senate. And then I hope the Prime Minister has enough self-reflection to realise he called it wrong on Thursday, when instead of having a vote as to whether or not the Parliament of Australia thinks the people of Australia support a Royal Commission into the lives of people with disability, suffering violence and neglect. Instead of voting for that measure - which is well overdue, he ran down the clock because he was more worried about appearing that he didn't control the parliament than doing the right thing. Now I am optimistic that this government realising the public pressure which has materialised, which we were going to do after the election if successful. We now have an opportunity to do this now. So I hope that by Monday - if not before Monday, but by Monday when this matter comes to a vote, the government votes to support a Royal Commission to prevent abuse and neglect against Australians living with disability. I think we can do that even in the dying days of the 45th Parliament. We don't need to wait for an election to say enough is enough, that we don't support the abuse and neglect of our own and I think a Royal Commission is the best way, it's the king of all enquiries. We can do that and we can say to people with disability, here's another gap between inequality and the equality, and we're going to bridge it. I now would like to ask Linda Burney, our Shadow spokesperson to speak and then some of the lovely, fantastic people here who have never given up on their families and would just like parliament to show a little bit of that love that they show every day, to the people they love.
LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES:  Good morning and thank you Bill for those words. An enormous thank you and debt of gratitude to the people that have joined us this morning to speak to you about their personal experiences, to talk to you about their children, and to also hear from advocates who have been working in the space for a very long time. People with a disability have waited long enough. They have waited long enough and the time has come for a Royal Commission into the abuse and neglect and of course, the violence perpetrated against people with disability. For the people that joined Bill and I this morning, this is not academic, this is their reality every single day. The policy arguments for a Royal Commission are overwhelming, the time has come. We want a broad-based Royal Commission into disability and the terms of reference Labor has committed to for the last two years, should be worked out in consultation with the people that understand this issue and the families that live this daily life. This Royal Commission cannot be tacked on to the Aged Care Royal Commission that is taking place at moment. It must be a stand-alone Royal Commission. And as I've said, the terms of reference will be worked out in consultation with the people we have with us this morning. The treatment of people with disability is a national shame in this country, and all of us know someone whether in our family, within our workspace, within our friends, that would be saying this morning to the government, and particularly to the Prime Minister, the time for this Royal Commission has come. We must give people a powerful voice and as Bill has said, a Royal Commission is the king of inquiries, and it will give people that join us today and many thousands of people across this country, that voice. I am going to invite people to share with you, some of their personal experiences and I ask you to take the time to listen to them. This Royal Commission must be broad-ranging, it must cover institutional care, and what happens in the daily lives of people. It is critically important that it happen immediately. And as our leader has indicated, we want the government to come on board to see the need, and vote for a Royal Commission on Monday. I am going to now invite some of our friends with us to have their say, I don't know what order we are going to go in but who would like to try first? Mark? Are you alright? Go for it.

MARK MODRA, PARENT: Kevin Stone from Valid asked me to come along today and tell a little bit of our story, my family's story. Most of my son's story is already in the public domain for people to read. My son's name is Luke and I am his father - sorry, that's a joke. Well, like Anakin I too have acted with great passion and fervour for the people that I love, and that's caused me to make mistakes in the past, created some enemies. I would also like to say that now fortunately for my son we're in a stage of rebuilding his life, creating a new life for him where he's well supported. A great team of people, the NDIS has provided an adequate level of money to pay for that support, and my other children are now returning to what they considered was a normal life. It's only two years ago they started to say that, my son is 30 so that's a long time that my other children suffered. My son has severe autism and a long and very sad history of traumatic events and challenging behaviours. He's - yeah, from a very, very early age we believe that he was abused, right through his young childhood years by various people, and some of whom started out meaning well, but ended up being trapped in a system that didn't let them care the way they wanted to. With my son reacting to events that had happened to him prior, and I suppose I've said a little bit more than wanted to say, but the main thing, the main reason I'm in support of a Royal Commission is we need to make the truth plain for people to see, so that we can work with it. And the main point from my perspective is my son's got great support. He lives really well today, but every other day he will have a memory, and being autistic he doesn't just remember those traumatic events where people abused him. He suffers the same emotions, his brain reacts, it recreates those emotions, and he actually tries to replay those events, on himself and on other people. Even today and that is the consequence of abuse of a child at a young age can live through a person's life until they die.

KEVIN STONE, EXECUTIVE OFFICER, VALID:  Describe, describe what happened with that piece of wood.

MARK: Oh come on

STONE: You need to go there.

MARK: Look, I wish you were the Prime Minister because I'd need your permission anyway.

STONE: If you can't go there, don't.

MARK: No, I will and I'm going to take longer than perhaps you want us to, but I have to apologise to this lady here, I've forgotten your name.

SHORTEN: Deb.

MARK: Deborah, because she told the story about her son who's at school, a young child at school. I had to go and apologise to her because we had the chance to take a stand and seek justice for my son, to uncover all the abuse that happened to him. But after all of the hearings that we went through, we ended up in the High Court of Australia, we decided to forgive those who'd abused my son. A very difficult thing for a father to do, to forgive on behalf of his son. Only to find that he still lives with his memories and we’re still have to deal with the consequences of that. And families are still suffering in exactly the same way. I now wish that we'd actually pursued it through to completion, and I hope that the commission will do that instead without causing all the trouble for us to say so.

SHORTEN: Don't be too hard on yourself.

MARK: Anyway I probably said too much.

BURNEY: No, you've been fabulous.

STEPHANIE GOTLIB, CEO - CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE WITH DISABILITY AUSTRALIA: Hi everyone, I'm Stephanie Gotlib from Children and Young People with Disability Australia. I just wanted to follow on from Mark's comments and also Deborah I think, who will speak shortly, is what I see commonly or its commonplace for children and young people to experience abuse and violence throughout their childhood that can't go on. I hear daily of incidents of real concern you know, from kids being pinned to the ground, from kids being in restraint and seclusion at school, to kids being bullied. We've got around 60 percent of kids being bullied at the moment. You know that's at school, that is just not okay. And when I say bullying I don't mean name calling I mean serious physical assaults, rocks thrown at them, food thrown at them, we have to stop it. This can't be the typical experience for children and young people with disability in Australia. We've heard today very strongly that, that has lifelong consequences and it's got to stop and the sooner we have a Royal Commission the better. Thank you.
BURNEY: Would anyone else like to say something?

ADVOCATE: Relatively speaking I got very lucky. It was my experiences as a child, as a boy. Although I did it have a moment of - in my second - in my first high school of being called names, punched in the guts and then one case of sexual harassment. I even told the principal of that first high school that I did not feel safe but yet it took four year of abuse for something to happen that was to my satisfaction, that required me going to another school.  And hearing these stories again and again just thinking, it's just heart crushing to hear all these tales of abuse and I just want to know why this keeps happening. Why people think they're allowed to get away with it. This is why we need a Royal Commission to put a stop to all this.

PETER: Yes, hello my name is Peter Curotte. I'm the father of Alexander Curotte, and this is Alexander's mum and my wife Paula Curotte.

PAULA: Hello.

PETER: Alexander is 33 years old and he has been in care since he was eleven because he has had pretty intense behavioural difficulties. But he sustained no injuries of any note with us right, while he was living with us, with a family of three younger children. But there were substantial issues that forced us to seek respite care for him. Twenty-two years later he was still in state care, in a concrete house. We've advocated very hard for him all the way through. His body bears witness to his life, he has scars all over his body. He cannot walk, he has hemiplegia. He's been suffocated under a blanket. We have medical scans that indicate that he has a hypoxic brain injury. He's also had a general hematoma from endlessly beating his own head on the floor of an unpadded house. He’s been sexually abused, that's case number 38 at the Royal Commission heard before Justice (inaudible) on the 22nd of March 2016. He's been disrespected in so many ways. He's no longer there. On the 25th of October which was a Thursday at lunchtime last year, we drove to Alexander's house which was a disability accommodation services unit and residential services and we, as his guardians, parents and administrators, we removed him put him in our old car and we drove him home. The reason we did that is that on the 16th of October he'd sustained injuries, and these injuries were photographed three days later in a dental hospital, where he had a planned procedure which we had medically cleared, so it still happened. And you will see that he's under the effect of anaesthetic so we could get a good photo, so that bruise was extensive and there was also significant tissue damage and a distal fracture of the left clavicle. He returned after the surgery to the unit, I worked in there for a while. I'm trained in those areas, unpaid I worked, because I had authority to give him the medication that he required. Then I melted away and just kept regular contact on the Thursday morning of the 25th. These happened on the 16th of October sorry - on the Thursday morning we heard that he was bleeding from his right eye. That's after he was cleaned up. We went straight to the house put him in the car and my wife and I tried to keep him calm, a young man who was working with him under our employ dabbed the blood was running down his right cheek. He's now 115 days away from that situation. He's living in an apartment hotel in your electorate I think Bill, and he needs a home. He'll never return to where he was. He's actually asked me to talk to Bill Shorten, I think I've done that now. Alexander is a lovely person but he can't walk. He couldn't walk from here to that cameraman without falling over. When he was with us he could run like the wind. So many things have happened. We almost can't believe this has happened to him but we now realise this happens to lots of people. So we just say again, to the people of Australia and their elected representatives, let's go right for it. Let's get a Royal Commission - a separate Royal Commission into violence and abuse and neglect of people with disability in Australia. They live under the same sun, they breathe the same air. They are Australians and I thank you.
ADVOCATE: Hi, I am the very proud parent of a child with a disability, and recently my son it became evident that he was abused at his special school, and this began at the age of four where he was put in a tent in a cupboard. Then recently, he was restrained - forcefully restrained, tied down with rope and put in a confined space. He has countless times been pulled around by his limbs and also been to - he's been isolated from other students on a daily basis. So this is basically assaulted, imprisoned falsely, and dehumanised, dumbed down with little to no education. This is a child who is teachable, a child who is manageable with the right professional supports, and a child who is celebrated by his family and treated as an equal. So this should not be happening. I fear that this is a lot bigger than the school environment. It's systemic in the community, and the longer that there's a hold on this Royal Commission, everyday another child or adult is abused with a disability. So this is just - enough is enough, basically. These people in the community deserve to be treated as equals. Thank you.
BURNEY: Is there anyone else that would like to step up, come on now.

HEATHER FORSYTH: I am Heather Forsyth. I am a person with an intellectual disability and I’m 46 years of age. I was abused by a family member, and I'm still to this day finding it very hard to talk about that. With the support of my colleagues at work, we are doing a (inaudible) safe project where we are telling people out there it's not okay. It's okay to complain.
BRONWYN MORKHAM, NATIONAL DIRECTOR, YOUNG PEOPLE IN NURSING HOMES NATIONAL ALLIANCE: Hello I'm Bronwyn Morkham I am the Young People in Nursing Homes Alliance National Director. The only thing I'd like to add to what's already been said is that we need a separate Royal Commission. We do not want to see a Royal Commission tacked on to the existing Aged Care Royal Commission. Young people enter nursing homes, but they have disabilities before they go into nursing homes and we need to be looking at what happens to people with a disability broadly. Thank you.

STONE: My name's Kevin Stone I'm chair of Inclusion Australia. How can you not vote for a Royal Commission. How can you say you are not interested in finding the truth. I can't believe it. We issued the call seven years ago for a stand alone Royal Commission into abuse and neglect. This stuff continues to happen. The NDIS is welcome, in a sense that it is improving the service system and the response to people with disabilities. But you actually don't heal unless you expose, unless you rip that band-aid off and let the air in. And for many people with disability and their families, these atrocities are a daily occurrence across the country. People are abused sexually, physically, financially - they're ripped off in all sorts of ways they're bullied. Every day my organisation, Valid in Victoria deals with new incidents, new complaints of abuse. One currently for instance, where a staff member has reportedly held a person down and burnt them with an iron - a hot iron. Another case, where a person with disability was basically kicked to the ground and dragged along the carpet. These things happen every day in this country, and until we actually get to the truth and expose that truth we're not going to improve this system at all. The NDIS will never make a difference in the lives of people with disability unless we expose these truths. So we support and reiterate our strong call for an independent standalone Royal Commission and we commend Bill, the Labor Party on standing with us. Thank you.
ROSS JOYCE, CEO, AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION OF DISABILITY ORGANISATIONS: Ross Joyce, I’m the Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Federation of Disability Organisations. We're a national peak body, we have members right across the country, and we stand firmly behind an independent Royal Commission, and us and all of our colleagues across the advocacy sector are really keen to see this get ahead and be started. We're very tired of the wait and I think today you've got what I would consider just a tip of the iceberg of the things that are going on out there, from real people standing here telling you what's happened in their situation. And I think it's appalling that it continues to be dragged on, but I also want to congratulate Bill, Linda and the ALP for their strong commitment. We were here in 2017. Bill made a commitment to us that there is going to be a Royal Commission. I know he's been fighting hard along with his team to get that through. And I'd also like to mention also the Greens and Senator Jordan Steele-John doing a fantastic job of also working on that and pushing that through. And that's because they understand the issues that are out there, the issues that are happening every day. We're tired of it, Prime Minister we want you to just do it. You've got a chance to do it, do it now please.
SHORTEN: Thanks. Alright I thank everyone and I appreciate the journalists here letting people tell their story. You can sense that for a long time people have had stories to tell but there's not enough people listening. So over to you.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns that a Royal Commission may take too long to give its findings and what could be done now to assist?

SHORTEN: Well whatever should - where there are complaints and there's violence that should be reported now, but we've tried everything else. There might be some Australians who say oh, we had a Royal Commission into the banks, we need a Royal Commission into age care, might be a bit of Royal Commission fatigue. We had one into institutional responses to the abuse of children within the care of institutions. But what people should understand, if they can take a moment to pause, is that people who live with disabilities and their families have fallen between the cracks. If you were abused in a church run orphanage or a government orphanage we've heard about that - that's dreadful. Hopefully we will hear about the way old people are getting treated in aged care and the failings in that system and of course, people who were ripped off by banks. There's a whole sector of our community, and they don't have a voice. If you are a carer of someone who's got a high degree of autism, you don't really have time to get on you know, Sky News or get a column in a newspaper - you don't have time. You're too busy just making ends meet and loving your child, or loving your adult child. We also know that everything else hasn't worked. By that I mean that we've had inquiries. When the advocates called for it seven years ago there was a Senate Inquiry in 2015 - and I do want to give Senator Jordan from the Greens a shout out for his stand in the Senate. But the point about it is that the Senate did an investigation and there's been plenty of state investigations. The Queensland Human Rights Commission investigated the use of forcible restraints on people with disabilities, for example. The problem is a lot of these reports get announced, they get done, and then they're put on the shelf and you're really dependent upon the amount of energy a particular government, or a particular political party might put into a particular part of the system. It's just time for a Royal Commission, so I say to Australians who are weighing up, oh another Royal Commission, the reality is there has never been another proper Royal Commission into violence against people with disabilities. This is the time, everything else has been tried and failed. Labor called for it two years ago. We weren't expecting the government - to be honest we weren't expecting them to get rid of Turnbull and for the wheels to fall off the cart and the division in the government. But really, that's not our problem here today. Our opportunity is that we have a case where the Parliament of Australia could finally speak up for a group of people who don't have the physical or financial resources to speak up for themselves. If you know that the abuse is likely to be repeated, if you know that the neglect and the violence is likely to be recurring, what is the argument against a Royal Commission and a Royal Commission right now.

JOURNALIST: Looks like the government will support your motion next week. What do you make of that and is that them trying to save face or, what's your take on it?.

SHORTEN: So I don't mind the motivation for them reversing the position. On Thursday, government Senators supported by Senator Pauline Hanson voted to block a Royal Commission. We asked them Thursday afternoon to reconsider their position, instead they ran down the clock. You know the old footy trick, they kick the ball down the one end, the AFL aficionados, and they just basically wanted to try and run the clock down, so the siren would go and they wouldn't have to deal with the issue last Thursday. Well that happened. So they had a win, well done. Well, we're back to it on Monday. What I say to the government though is that if you vote for the Royal Commission, then implement it. We'll work with you on the terms of reference. Please don't fob this off and say to us we don't have a set of terms of reference, we can work that out. Please don't fob this off by saying there's been other inquiries - there haven't of this nature. And please don't fob this off and just vote for it and then go back to talking about whatever else you want to talk about and just hope that people forget - we won't. This is a chance to do some good. You know, one of the big complaints I've heard across summer about the Parliament of Australia is when will you talk about us, the people, rather than about yourselves. This is a great chance to talk about a bunch of people who no one is talking about enough, and we could do that together on Monday and at least produce some good news out of an otherwise pretty chaotic and divided situation.

JOURNALIST: On another matter does the Opposition support the Government’s domestic violence technology trials?

SHORTEN: Sorry can you say that again, I just couldn’t hear you.

JOURNALIST: Does the Opposition support the Government’s domestic violence technology trials that have just been announced?

SHORTEN: Do you want to answer Linda?

BURNEY: We see domestic violence as being a nonpartisan issue and the forward action plan which is what you're referring to is something that Labor will support, absolutely. We're also looking at very much making sure that we get services to the front line in domestic violence, but yes we will be supporting the government’s initiatives in terms of domestic violence.

JOURNALIST: Could the money be better spent perhaps with prevention methods instead of these technology trials as a way of (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Yes listen I just - I think it was former Prime Minister Turnbull, he you know, because of his investment banking background was quite interested in technology apps and I think he was onto something. You know, I've got teenage kids, teenage daughters. I see the value of technology apps in terms of how you can help monitor safety and the same would go in the domestic violence situation. But it's no good just having an app if the woman who's receiving the abuse doesn't have a house to go to. So you were interested in prevention but we're interested in front line. It's no good having an app if you can't get legal aid. It's no good having an app if you can't get time off work with paid domestic violence leave. So yes, technology helps us keep people safer, but I also think it's not a substitute for funding of the frontline services. The refuges and the accommodation after the refuges, the paid domestic violence leave, and of course making sure that the legal system doesn't punish you a second time, having been punished already.

JOURNALIST: Just back on the Disability Royal Commission. You've accused the government of playing politics to avoid the vote. How much responsibility do you take for that on Thursday given you withdrew the Matter of Public Importance.

SHORTEN:  The only way that we could have a vote on the Royal Commission was to stop the Matter of Public Importance. What's the government's excuse? We wanted to speed up the debate so we could have a vote on a Disability Royal Commission. Frankly I was surprised that the Government's Senators voted against it Thursday morning. To be honest aren't you all a bit surprised that a government made up of functioning adults, who you know, are committed to keeping people safe. They've got a lot to say about safety but I was surprised when they voted against it, to be honest. We had a Senate Inquiry in 2015. That didn't beat any land speed records, it was important work though. In 2017, in May with some of the very people you see here, we said we would support a Royal Commission, the government then said no. So I make no apology for fighting to have a Royal Commission into the treatment of people disabilities and violence. I mean, the Government's got a little bit of form though hasn't it. It's been 633 days since we called for a Royal Commission into disability. We couldn't have predicted 630 days ago that the government would you know, get rid of Malcolm Turnbull, they would nearly give us Peter Dutton, you know just have the sort of chaos that they're in. But that's not our issue, our issue is the people, our issue is a Disability Royal Commission. So you know, if the government doesn't want to have a vote that's up to them, but they voted against it. All I say to the government is just reverse your position and I think it just shows you - I mean what I really think happened is that the current Prime Minister is desperate because he's lost control of the parliament. His own government was meant to bring forward energy legislation to help lower prices on energy and they're divided and can't do that. So rather than show that he can't control the parliament they've stopped governing and are running down the clock. I mean if they don’t want to govern, if they don't want the parliament to vote on matters, then he should just go to an election.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned terms of reference before. Ideally what terms of reference would you like to see for this Royal Commission?

SHORTEN: I'll get Linda to supplement it, but what we think is that it can't just be about individual incidents and it can't just be about people in institutional care. The fact of the matter is that we need to make sure we look at the issue of forcible restraint, but none of these issues are totally clear cut. But it is clear cut that people are suffering. I might get Linda to supplement some of the other topics.

BURNEY: Thank you Bill, the terms of reference will be based on the principal of we will work them through and work them out with many of the people that we've got here today - advocates and people living with disability. It is important that we just don't think about the individual, but we actually think about the whole family. So that will be done in consultation with those peripheral people. And as Bill has said we want it to not be just about people in institutions. We want a broad ranging inquiry and we want to make sure that there is capacity for people like our friend here for historical abuse to be reported, to be given as well. So it will be broad ranging, it will be done in consolation on terms of reference with the people that are affected. It will cover all situations of people living with disability and it will also have a historical component as well.

JOURNALIST: Just on another matter, there was a news report today quoting a people smuggler who said people smugglers are going to target Australia should Labor get into government. What is your response to that and how would you prevent that?

SHORTEN: So someone asks a criminal to give an explanation of why they're a criminal, and the fact that they are still a criminal and want to be a criminal - I put that in the criminal bin, I'm not interested. We always know that there are people who would seek to undermine our border security. Under a Labor government we'll have a ring of steel around this country, but the issue though that the government is conflating, is they are confused that you can only have strong borders by treating people in our care cruelly - I don't buy that argument. We will have strong borders under a Labor government. We will make sure that our ADF, our air assets our sea assets, our Australian Border Force have whatever resources they needed to defeat people smugglers. But what we won't accept is that it should be Peter Dutton who gives medical advice to people as opposed to treating doctors. It is possible in this country to have strong borders and the humane treatment of people within our care. And if the government's so worried about it you've got to ask yourself why is it that in the last four years alone 64, 000 people have arrived by air claiming asylum, and many of those claims have found to be unmeritorious. What's happened is this government has stopped the boats and now they're catching the plane.

JOURNALIST: The PM is out in Braddon today to make a forestry announcement, do you think it's about wooing blue collar voters? Trying to win back the Greens?

SHORTEN: Listen, it's a free country he can go wherever he wants. If you want to win back blue collar voters - restore penalty rights. If you want to win back working class families, lower energy prices. If you want to win back blue collar voters, don't cut Medicare. If you want to do something about blue collar voters give them a tax refund like Labor is proposing of $1000 each, every year. If you want to win back blue collar voters start talking about cost of living, of why is everything going up except your wages. The fact of the matter is this is a government as it approaches its last week in parliament other than its budget propaganda week. This is the last week and what are they going to talk about? They are not going to talk about energy because they're too divided. They're not going to talk about protecting small business because the National Party rebels want to vote with Labor. They've got no plan on cost of living, they've got no wages policy at all. I mean, last week the Reserve Bank has had to lower the projections of growth under this government, and we saw last week that housing approvals are falling, not increasing. This is a government who's given up governing. This is a government who wants to talk about absolutely everything except why the economy is not working in the interest of working and middle class people.

JOURNALIST: The government's also got another announcement in Warringah with Tony Abbott today. What's your read on that, is it just to hold on?

SHORTEN: What is the announcement they're making in Warringah? Sorry I wasn't (inaudible).

BURNEY: I don't know either.

SHORTEN: Well it's good that the Liberals have discovered their safe seats and are belatedly trying to remind voters there that they're not taking it for granted. But if I was a voter in a safe Liberal seat like Higgins in Melbourne or Kooyong or Flinders, where you've got Peter Dutton's ally Greg Hunt, being attacked by Independent Liberal Julia Banks. When they start seeing the government give them promises in those seats, you'd have to conclude that the reason why the government is giving them promises in those seats is because they realise they haven't done anything and they're worried about losing the votes. And just as the voters in Wentworth discovered, if you don't vote for the Liberals you're probably going to get more attention from the Liberals, than if you just voted for the Liberals.

JOURNALIST: Support has slumped for the LNP in Queensland according to a YouGov poll out today, but votes are flowing to the United Australia Party. Will you seek UAP's preferences in Queensland?

SHORTEN: I would like Clive Palmer to pay the money he owes the taxpayers of Australia instead of spending taxpayers money promoting his own head on billboards around the country. Labor's focus on getting primary votes. We've got a good plan for Queenslanders, it's a good plan for all Australians. We know that everything is going up in this country except wages, so we have a wages policy. We know the cost of living is a real problem for working and middle class families living in regional Queensland or any other part of Australia, that’s why we're going to cap the increase in private health insurance fees. That is why we're going to back in more renewable energy and solar batteries, so people get solar rooftop power batteries and be able to force down and take control of their own power bills. It's why we're going to do more funding of Medicare, so that people don't have to pay more out of pocket cost to go and see the doctors. If you want to get someone's vote my view is that you need to talk about them not yourself, and I say to Australians, I hear you loud and clear. The other thing which we can promise Australians is stability. This Government's been in for less than six years. They're on their third Prime Minister, the National Party and the Liberals can't agree on energy policy, they're all over the show. So we're focusing on the people and that's I think the best strategy. But I will say in closing this interview - unless there are any other questions -

JOURNALIST: One more.

SHORTEN: One more and then I'll just close, okay two more.

JOURNALIST: Will you try to seek to ban religious schools discriminating against students on the basis of their sexuality in the final sitting week before the election?

SHORTEN: Well we think that the case for not discriminating against kids on the basis of sexuality is 100 per cent clear. We would like to see that legislated. Of course, we need to get everyone else in the Parliament to agree with us.
JOURNALIST: This might be a bit of a tricky one, but what do you make of Senator Michaelia Cash's evidence yesterday in the AWU case. She seems to have distanced herself from it, or tried to.

SHORTEN: I don't know if you've ever seen that show Muriel's Wedding and it was an actor - an Aussie actor called Bill Hunter and he kept running into this lady Deidre Chambers and it was always a great surprise. And you know, you've got to say there's Michaelia Cash saying that she's not playing political games, tipping off the media - her office tipping off the media. What a surprise to see you Deidre Chambers, to see you at the scene of another attempt to smear the unions and the Labor Party. Listen whatever she told the court I'm sure she believes it, I just don't know if anyone else does. Alright, I just want to finish on this issue of a Royal Commission. I just say to Australians again saying, oh well you know, is this really the problem that you say it is? I am telling you now - speak to a parent with a child with disabilities, speak to someone who's been in care or had to deal with the challenge of their impairment and some of the treatment they've got. This is an overdue problem for attention. Everything else has been tried - a Royal Commission just makes sense. That's what the families are calling out for, it's what the experts are calling out for. I've would ask the Government to reverse their position from Thursday. This is this is an idea whose time has come. People shouldn't be denied justice just because the government is feeling concerned about controlling parliament. Thanks everybody.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Great to be here at the United Nations International Women's Day breakfast, talking about how we as a nation can ensure that Australian women receive equal treatment and women around the world, in particular in the Pacific, get a fair go. I might also just take the liberty of saying it's Valentine's Day, so I just want to say Happy Valentine's Day to Chloe through my friends in the media. Perhaps if there's any questions, happy to take some.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, what do you make of the fight between Pauline Hanson and Brian Burston. Is this a bad look for parliament?

SHORTEN: Well violence is unacceptable. The footage which I've seen is really - it has no place in parliament. What we're seeing is that some of these small parties are just consumed by themselves. It would be comic except it's not, it's violence and unparliamentary conduct. Clearly the One Nation Party has descended back into chaos which it tends to do.

JOURNALIST: What did you make of Scott Morrison's press conference yesterday in response to the amendments in the Senate?

SHORTEN: Listen, I think this country in 2019 is not the same nation as 2001. I do not believe that Australians want a government which governs by slogans and fear. We can have strong borders in this country - and I'm grateful for the work of Australian Border Force, the ADF and our public service - but strong borders does not need to come at the price of humane treatment of people who've been in our care for half a decade or more. I totally repudiate the attacks of the Government, seeking to whip up fear and hysteria, seeking to lure people smugglers to entice people onto boats to come to Australia. Under a government I lead, we will turn back boats where it is safe to do so. People who seek to come to Australia by boat will go to Nauru and will be regionally processed to third-party nations. But this nation has voted yesterday to say that for people who've been in our care for literally thousands of days, where their treating doctors say there is an issue or an illness requiring medical evacuation, we've been prepared to codify what the Government is already doing. Never forget this government has bought 900 people from Manus and Nauru to Australia. Hundreds of sick people and members of their family. None of them have gone back. So I actually think that what we're fighting about or disagreeing about, the substance isn't as great as the Government says. But in 2019, this is a government who's run out of offering Australians hope. They just want to rule by fear and by slogans. They should be ashamed of themselves for luring people to Australia by somehow implying that this Government hasn't got strong borders.

JOURNALIST: Christmas Island, the reopening of that, over I think five years, projected estimates is $1.2 billion. Seems like a very extravagant point for the Prime Minister to make by reopening it.

SHORTEN: Well again, I think Australians can see through desperate political tactics. This Government has now decided to spend a billion dollars to try and score a political point. Let me make it very clear to people smugglers in Indonesia or elsewhere: you and your trade are not welcome. Any government I lead will deploy the full force of the ring of steel of the Australian defence forces and our border forces. But I say to the Government: people smugglers are vicious criminals, they will twist the words of the current Government and say somehow, people should get on unsafe boats. The opening of Christmas Island, I believe, was a political gesture designed to fuel domestic political unrest but I'm worried that we'll have tragic consequences because this is a government addicted to slogans and fear. The Australian people are better than Mr Morrison appreciates. I believe that the vast majority of Australians understand you can have a strong border and still treat people humanely within our care. And I know the Government understands that anyone who chooses to arrive now will not be able to use this medi-vac legislation. This medi-vac legislation is purely and utterly for a few hundred people who've been in detention under Australia's care for years and years and years.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just on Christmas Island - do you think that the Government is opened it because any one that's transferred to the island for medical attention, it's because the island is annexed and they can't access the legal system?
SHORTEN: Well listen, I know that this Government has had a system in place where by and large, if you're sick and the doctors say come to Australia, that is what's happened. The Parliament has codified what the Government is doing but now for domestic political reasons - because they have no agenda for Australians. I wish this Government - this Government loves to talk about boats but the problem is it never talks about the fact that everything's going up in Australia except the wages. They -

JOURNALIST: But -

SHORTEN: No, you asked a question. I am going to -

JOURNALIST: But many people who -

SHORTEN: Sorry, I am going to answer your question. I am going to answer your question and at the end of it, by all means, give me a follow up. But I am not going to let the Government off the hook here. I'm going to hold them to account. They just want to talk about a few hundred sick refugees on Nauru. The Australian people want to talk about why is everything going up except their wages? Why after six long years are the energy prices of Australians out of control? Small businesses want to talk about the fact that retail confidence has gone down and down and down under this Government. There are many hundreds of thousands of Australians, millions of Australians, who want a government who'll take action on climate change. I promise the Australian people - be it the circus antics in One Nation, be it the Government's policy of fear and slogans, we're not going to get distracted. In 2019, for the Labor Party, we think Australian politics should be about you and your families. Labor's got a better plan to give you a bigger tax refund for the people who go to work, we're going to make sure that we take real action on climate change and we are a united and stable Opposition. Thanks everybody, see you.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: It's great to be here at Liberty OneSteel today, with Bill Shorten, Labor leader, Jason Clare, our trade spokesperson, and Chris Gambian, the Labor candidate for Banks, and I want to thank Neil and Mark and Shane for facilitating our visit today, giving us a tour and giving us the opportunity particularly to speak to the workers here. We are in an economy that is not working for everyone. Well, it's working for the top end of town, but not working for ordinary working people. We know that everything's going up except people's wages, and Bill has been taking the opportunity to go around and meet with working people right across Australia and talk to them about Labor's positive plans, our fair go plan, our action plan to ensure that we build an economy that works for all. So I'm delighted to welcome Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Kristina, and I'm here with Senator Keneally and my Shadow Trade Minister who will be in charge of stopping unfair dumping of imported product in Australia, Jason Clare. And Chris Gambian, Labor's candidate for Banks - a local boy, born and bred, committed to Australian jobs. Today I had a chance to see a manufacturing facility which deserves more help from Canberra than the one million manufacturing workers and small businesses are getting from the current government. Labor's got an exciting plan to crack down on the unfair dumping, of cheap imported products undermining Australian jobs and Australian quality. We're also very committed to making sure that when the Commonwealth of Australia spends precious and important taxpayer money on badly needed rail and road infrastructure, that we make sure that we prioritise using Australian steel in everything that requires steel. But the other message I had today for the workforce of Arrium and the working people right across Australia, is that within 100 days at the most, Australians will be voting on a range of important issues and there is no issue any more important than the growing gulf between cost of living and flagging wages in this country. What is happening is that the growing gulf between rising cost of living and slow wages growth, it's hurting millions of Australians – they’re dipping into their household savings. This government has no wages policy and wherever I travel in Australia, and here was no exception in South Western Sydney, everything is going up except people's wages. Labor wants to see that change. So when people have a black and white choice at the election, there's no more black and white issue than wages and wages policy. We want to close the gap between rising cost of living and low wages growth. This government wants to increase the gap. Few things hurt Australians as much as a Coalition Government determined to keep wages low in this country, but within 100 days Labor can change that, and make sure that this economy starts working the interests of working and middle class Australians, not just the very top end of town. I'd like to ask Chris our candidate to say a few words and I'll take any questions people have.

CHRIS GAMBIAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BANKS: Thanks Bill and thanks everybody it's great to welcome you back to Revesby and to see some of the great work and some of the great workers that make this area and our nation's economy strong. Scarcely a day goes by in this election campaign that I don't meet a family or a young person who talks about their personal struggle to make ends meet and to get by. This economy is not working for everyday people, whether it's young people trying to get their first job, or trying to get into university or pay their bills by working weekends in hospitality. Young people have got nothing from this Government and really no prospects from what this Government is offering. For businesses like this one that want to do the right thing by their workforce, from families, where both parents are working trying to get by with child care and the cost of funding schools, or to older people who are trying to get by on the pension and try to make ends meet. This economy is not working for the people that have made this country strong and people that will continue to make this country strong. So it's great to know that within the next hundred days, we're going to have the opportunity to elect a Prime Minister and a government that actually believes in working people and believes in the strength of the real economy. Thanks very much.

SHORTEN: Thanks Chris. Are there any questions for my colleagues or I?

JOURNALIST: The Morrison Government has a jobs target. What is Labor's jobs target and where do you think jobs will be coming from in the next couple of years?

SHORTEN: First of all with the government's jobs target we think that is a reasonable goal for both sides of politics, although I do note that the jobs growth that the government's promised, they were unclear was it full time or part time jobs. But I believe, and most economists and business analysts will forecast, that in the next five years a government should be able to be in charge where we add an extra 1.25 million jobs. So I think that is a reasonable proposition and that's based on the forecasts of economists. In terms of where jobs come from in the future, I think this is more important issue than just part time jobs per say. We need more jobs which have better trained workforces. The jobs of the future, in many cases, are going to require a university qualification or TAFE qualification. That's why Labor is committed to properly funding our schools. We want to make sure that the kids coming out of the school system have got the best education possible to prepare them for the jobs of the future. And when we also talk about preparing our young people for jobs in the future, it's important that we give people a chance to get to university. Labor's got exciting policies which will ensure that an extra 200,000 Australians get a chance to go to university over the next ten years. We're also going to put a lot more money into TAFE and technical training. It's a real concern that under this current government the number of apprentices has fallen so dramatically -  north of 400,000 apprentices before this government came in, and now it's under 300,000. This is a disaster. Our population has gone up, the number of apprentices we've got have gone down. So Labor's got an exciting policy to make sure that we put more money into vocational education, and we're also going to pay the upfront fees, in the first three years alone, of 100,000 apprentices. So what we're going to do is give Australians the best possible chance to be well trained for the jobs of the future. And when we talk about jobs in the future my vision of Australia is not that you either work in a bank or quarry or a mine. They are important sectors of the economy, but I'm interested in how we value add our raw materials here in Australia. I think Australians are sick of the view that we just ship our raw materials overseas and then we buy it back at greatly inflated prices because someone else somewhere else has manufactured it and turned it into products we use. This Arrium business is a sign of what we can do if we back manufacturing in this country. So I'm bullish about the future of manufacturing under a Labor Government. I'm also very optimistic that we can do a lot more in health services because as we grow older people are going to need care and attention. So I see that as being important. The other exciting thing which I'd say is that we are going to back construction heavily. Residential construction is an engine room of the Australian economy. Labor's committed to building 250,000 houses, social housing, in the next ten years and what that will do is that'll mean there's a regular pipeline of work, and when you put that on top of Labor's vision for better public transport in our cities, with much better rail infrastructure, and of course a very important program of road construction and regional Australia and our cities and suburbs, it's a bright future under Labor for jobs. We'll make sure that whenever a job comes up that people are able to have the skills to do it. And finally when it comes to jobs, we don't think that the jobs of the future should all be minimum wage very low jobs. We think that - we want to see more permanent well-paid jobs. That's what we're going to restore penalty rates as soon as we get elected for 700,000 Australians in retail and hospitality.

JOURNALIST: Just a quick change of topic. Do you have any more information on the parliamentary security breach and how were you affected?

SHORTEN: I think the Parliament - I've had some briefings on it. I'm satisfied from what I've heard initially that our security agencies and the President and the Speaker have moved in the right way to make sure that our parliamentary networks are secure. It is a wakeup call, it's not just Parliament House. I mean, in Parliament at least has resources to protect if people try and hack into our systems. But what I was thinking about this morning is we see the extent of the security necessary to restore the integrity of the system, is are we doing enough in this country for small and medium businesses to help protect them? They don't have the budget of the Parliament of Australia. If I'm Prime Minister, I'm going to invest a lot more in the cyber security of our small and medium sized enterprises. Of course the other thing which this is a wakeup call for is data. We give a lot of our data to the big international, multinational technology companies and online platforms. It's very important that I think we do more to protect our data. That's why I think the government in its sort of rushed and botched roll-out of My Health Record shows that, they've got to join the dots in this government. What happened today in Parliament is all part of a bigger picture. The internet is fantastic but there are people out there in the cyber world who want to do Australians, and Australian businesses, and Australian security harm, and I think this government needs to ramp up the priority it's paying on cyber security. Just because you can't see who your enemy is because they're on the internet, doesn't mean they're not your enemy.

JOURNALIST: The ABC understands security agencies are investigating whether China was behind the breach, how concerned are you to learn that?

SHORTEN: I wouldn't want to comment about ongoing investigations -

JOURNALIST: Is it concerning to you though?

SHORTEN: Cyber security is concerning. Now I just say that I'm satisfied with the level of communication I had with the parliamentary departments and the Speaker. But cyber security is a big issue. And I know that this is a government who is very focused on their own internal problems at the moment, but I worry that as our cyber enemies have grown in complexity and skill and cleverness, we've got a government who's been distracted from cyber security. But in particular, it's the protection of personal data and it's also helping small business harden up their security around cyber security. I think they are gaps in the current government's policies.
JOURNALIST: Just back on jobs. What is your view on the Government fast tracking visas for skilled migrants who are willing to live in regional areas?

SHORTEN: It's part of a bigger population discussion the nation has to have. We'll take the view of the experts about what is the right number for immigration. There's no point in bringing people into crowded cities if our infrastructure is not keeping up. So a big part of dealing with immigration is making sure that we've got the proper infrastructure to deal with it. It's only Labor who has got a proper plan for public transport in our national cities. It's only Labor who has got a proper plan to make sure our schools and our roads are properly funded. In terms of moving new Australians to the regions, we are up for that discussion and we think there are some regional communities who are keen to get more people. But it's just common sense and we want to make sure though that our infrastructure is coping with the people we bring in. I will say though on a temporary visas and temporary skilled labour: I don't think that we should be getting people from overseas for a day longer than it takes to train in Australia to do a skills shortage. That's why it's very important to double down on TAFE. I think the pendulum of privatisation has swung too far to privatisation in the case of vocational training. And I certainly want to put public TAFE back at the centre of our plans to train the workforce of the future rather than just relying upon overseas guest labour.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on the Kerryn Phelps' bill. Why did it take you 4 days to accept this security briefing?

SHORTEN: Why has it taken this Government five years to deal with the issue? Why is this Government only sitting for 10 days in eight months? This is a work-shy government. They couldn't work in an iron lung some of these ministers. So we'll take a briefing. In the four days which the Government wrote a fairly aggressive letter, who cares, what they say doesn't really distract me, when they're being nasty. I've been in Townsville visiting the floods, I've been Huonville to see the damage which those bushfires are doing there. I do think if there's middle ground, we should try and find it. Labor's supporting the Phelps' amendments. This is all about making sure that people in our care, no matter what the circumstances, receive appropriate medical quality care. That's what's driving us. We'll hear what the Government has to say. So let's forget the Government's free character assessment of Labor and let's just get on with the issues. We'll take the briefing from the Department early next week and we'll obviously, always listen to the facts.

JOURNALIST: And what do you make of the Home Affairs Department referring the leak of information to the AFP for investigation?

SHORTEN: It's hard for the Opposition to get information out of the Government but if you want to leak it, this Government leaks like a sieve. I think the Home Affairs Department has got questions to answer. How is it that national security secrets find their way into journalists' hands from the Home Affairs Department. I mean this is a government sort of leaking on the Government. Mind you, this isn't the Minister for Home Affairs' first mistake. I still think his biggest mistake was blowing up the Government last year in getting rid of Malcolm Turnbull. And if they're gonna have an inquiry, I wouldn't mind getting an answer out the Government why Malcolm Turnbull is not Prime Minister?
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Phelps' bill needs more work or will you we be supporting it immediately once you have those briefings?

SHORTEN: We will hear what the Government has to say. We think that the Phelps' bill is worth supporting. We do believe fundamentally that people in Australia's care, no matter what the circumstances, should receive quality medical care. And if that means coming to Australia, that's what should happen. We treat other people like this, I think that should be the rule. So we will clearly hear what the Government has to say.

JOURNALIST: On the fallout from the Banking Royal Commission, do you think that Ken Henry and Andrew Thorburn made the right decisions to announce they'll leave the NAB?

SHORTEN: Well that's for them to answer. Labor prosecuted the case for the Banking Royal Commission for the best part of two years before the Government and the banks finally surrendered. You know, I remember the CEO of NAB telling me he didn't see the need for the Royal Commission and I disagreed. Well, the facts have come out. I think the banks behaviour has been scandalous. But doesn't this highlight the fact that two senior bankers have now been forced to resign, highlights what I think the Government's been doing wrong since day one. The problem is the Government has tried to bury this issue of a Banking Royal Commission ever since we raised it. And now they're doing everything they can to stop parliament from even discussing the Royal Commission. We believe the Parliament should sit for an additional two weeks to discuss this Royal Commission. And yet again, just as the Government voted 26 times to stop the Banking Royal Commission - 26 times they said nothing to see here, they ran their protection racket because the Liberal Party of Australia is the political arm of big banks, they ran their protection racket. Well, we beat them then and we got the Banking Royal Commission, I think the Government's now gone next level when they won't even let the Parliament sit for longer than two weeks before an election because they don't want to talk about the Banking Royal Commission. It seems like they haven't got the message at all.

JOURNALIST: Do you expect the other leaders to resign and do you think they should?

SHORTEN: Well I don't know what every bank's done, but I think that Australians expect there to be real accountability. I think there was a little sigh of disappointment after the Hayne Royal Commission hit the deck but the next day, the banks were all hunkering down, nothing to see here, move along please. The Government was saying we'll do a go slow, we don't need to have Parliament sit. Why is it that the Liberal Party and the banks somehow seem to think that community attitudes don't apply to them? So, it remains to be seen what washes out. I think if no one out of the banks goes to jail, if no one gets prosecuted or charged, I think Australians would say there's been a cover-up. Now, we want to make sure that the Parliament does its bit to restore faith in our banking sector.

JOURNALIST: Will Labor be taking action in parliament next week to shut down the franking credits inquiry?

SHORTEN: This tainted inquiry has been dodgy from day one - and it's just gone from bad to worse. I think it is breathtaking that the Liberal politicians are colluding with their friends in the banking and investment community to protect existing business models. This is a government who will do everything they can to keep the status quo. And what they're doing is they're working with vested interests and fund managers to organise sittings of Parliament. A parliamentary committee is an extension of the Parliament. The idea that the Liberal Party have such a little respect for the Parliament of Australia that they will coordinate hearings of the Parliament to coincide with investor road shows from unhappy fund managers just shows you the new levels to which the once proud Liberal Party has sunk. And I think other Liberal politicians need to come clean. Was the Member for Goldstein acting as a lone gunman - organising with friends of his in the business community to set up parliamentary hearings? Or did other ministers know what was going on? We will pursue this matter. It's a tainted inquiry and it just shows you that when to push comes to shove, the Liberal Party will always look after protecting business models of the financial sector.

JOURNALIST: Is the Government doing enough to secure the race - the release, pardon me, of Hakeem Al-Araibi?

SHORTEN: I don't want to jump to judge the Government negatively on that. This man should be released. He should be returned to Australia but these are difficult issues when you're dealing with another sovereign nation so I'm not going to automatically criticise the Government here. We need to work together to get this man back to the northern suburbs of Melbourne.

JOURNALIST: And what lengths would a Labor government go to secure his release because the court process could drag into the Federal election?

SHORTEN: We would do whatever it takes but I'm not convinced that that's not also the Government's attitude. So I'm not going to criticise them there but they have our support. And the Australian people should always recognise that if you're caught up in this set of circumstances overseas, if I'm Prime Minister, we will do whatever it takes to bring you home.
JOURNALIST: The Closing the Gap report on Indigenous well-being will be released next week. What do you hope to see in that and what is your message to the Government?
SHORTEN: I hope that we see progress. What I would like to see the Government do is commit to properly funding remote housing for our first Australians. I'd like to see them do more in the field of education. I think there's more than we can do to improve the health outcomes and of course, there's more we can do to train up young Aboriginal nurses and doctors and trainees. We'll work with the Government but what we will also do is work with our first nations people. The best way to close the gap between first Australians and other Australians is to listen to the voices of our First Australians. But let's see what the report says. I worry that the progress isn't what it should be. And to Australians who say 'oh, why do we talk about first Australians'. I just say - they're not getting anything special out of this country. In many ways, the numbers, the statistics about their lives are not acceptable. And when one group of Australians is doing it really tough, that means all Australians are indirectly affected.

JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, have you accepted an offer for a briefing -

SHORTEN: Yeah.

JOURNALIST: on the security implications of the Phelps' bill.

SHORTEN: The Government's written to us. We've said we're happy to be briefed. Thank you, everybody - and thanks Arrium.

JENNY HILL, MAYOR OF TOWNSVILLE: I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for being here with us today, and seeing some of these - the issues that we have facing us as a community. Today I did a flyover around the city and through various areas of the community to look at the damage and the extent of damage. Ladies and gentlemen we will need all the support we can get to ensure that we can put this community back on an even keel as quickly as possible. The flyover showed how much damage there really is in and around our local community, and what we're going to need is to ensure that many - much of the bureaucracy as well as corporate Australia, are working together to help us get through these difficult times. I want to thank Cathy O'Toole and Belinda Hassan, thank you for coming and being up here, I know getting up from Mackay has been really difficult for you, but this is about talking about why we need infrastructure to ensure that we no longer get cut off by these sort of events. This event was one in a lifetime - I hope one in a lifetime. But the reality is it doesn't take much to cut this community off from the rest of Australia. I'd now like to ask the Leader of the Opposition for his comments from what he's seen today.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Jenny Hill. Jenny Hill is the Mayor of Townsville and might I just first start off by saying what a great job she's doing. And I might also just say to the waiting media here - I appreciate the job you've been doing communicating Townsville's battle, and the surrounding regions battle with this once in a lifetime, this once in 100-year set of floods. I didn't want to start this press conference until I'd heard directly from Jenny out of courtesy for the work she's done. But I appreciate your patience. Can I just say that what I've seen shows the worst that nature can throw at us, and the best of how Townsville and North Queenslanders respond. It has been eye opening. All of Australia has had its eyes on Townsville and the other towns in North Queensland. We've seen the video, the television images, but it is hard to appreciate the extent of the challenge until you're on the ground here. Townsville is a unique town in Australia because of its garrison nature. Many people around Australia have connections to Townsville and I think a lot of us have been hoping that the flood will pass and the people are safe. There has tragically been two deaths reported so far. But the overwhelming impression I get is, but for the timely leadership of the Council, of the work of the QPS, the QFS, the fire service,  the SES, of course the ADF -  but for far sighted decisions the damage could be far worse. But let me make it very clear. The burden on this community has been huge. Cathy O'Toole our local Member, Belinda Hassan our candidate in Dawson, have been visiting families; 22,000 households are affected directly by floodwater. Now I think but for the quick thinking and strategic decision making of council and the people up here, it could have been as many as 50,000. But a quarter of Townsville has been hit, and that's directly, that's not talking about the indirect effects. And I must acknowledge of course our farmers. A lot of them will have livestock, crop damage, fence damage, so it's not just in the built up areas that this flood has been an unprecedented, not in memory event. But what we also recognise is that hopefully by the weekend, and I was speaking with Premier Palaszczuk today, by the weekend hopefully most of the rain that's going to fall will have fallen - fingers crossed, and then we'll move into a recovery stage, and that's really where government comes into the picture. I salute the Townsville community spirit, but I recognise, and the message I carry from here today talking to the people on the ground, is we've got to make sure that Townsville gets support in its reconstruction. That's why people,  Australians, pay their taxes to Canberra. I'll be sending a very clear message to the current government; when it comes to disaster relief payments - they're modest payments of a $1000 for goodness sake. Now is not the time to be penny pinching and bean counting and adopting a black letter law approach. If people have had water across their floorboards, if they've got extensive mould in their houses, if they've had their power off for days and all their food is damaged or spoiled, if they've had extensive fence damage and have got a lot of waste to clean up, if they had to just evacuate their premises sensibly and been out of home for a couple of nights - they should get the modest government payment. Let us take the view in this country that when people are doing it hard, our default position as Australians is that you're telling us the truth. And if there are a few scallywags at the end of the day trying to rort the system, we'll come down on them like a tonne of bricks. But let us take a generous view to disaster relief. And I want to say to the insurance companies, that the eyes of Australia will be on you next. We want to make sure that you process claims. Let's not have lawyers at 30 paces trying to make sure you can get out of paying someone for flood damage. It's terrible, no amount of insurance will capture the scrapbooks and the photos that are lost, the memories, some of the paper records, the smell of the dirty carpet you've got to clean up, that mud everywhere which stinks and has to be cleaned up. No insurance is going to cover all of that, but where there are policies they should be honoured, and honoured in a speedy fashion. I also say to the insurers, make sure you use local contractors in the clean-up. Don't just do deals with your friends in Melbourne and Sydney and bring up contractors elsewhere, when we need to use local business. I also say apart from the government, be generous and not mean. To insurance companies, be straight up, and I say to my friends in the banks - and I use that term advisedly, now is not the time to be charging interest on the farmers and the small businesses who have gone with massive interruption to their income. This is where we pull together. I  don't want to see the profit motive, you know, everyone's pretty good now in the immediate aftermath, but a lot of people are going to hit a wall soon. The adrenaline stops and they just see the long weeks and months and years process rebuilding, sorting things out, starting again. I say to corporate Australia who've been good so far, now's the time for the banks and the insurance companies to keep your end of the bargain. The community support you and pay towards you in the premiums and the accounts, make sure you do the right thing by the people, because I and Labor will be watching you like a hawk. I should also just say in terms of some of the infrastructure needs, I've certainly come away from here with a view that we need to make sure farmers are getting support with their fodder, because that's when the burden will hit. And I also would just say in southern Townsville, the Murray Sport Complex, you  know there's a lot of community infrastructure and I pick that as one example. The hockey, the basketball, the AFL, the artificial turf - that'll have all been affected. So now is the time for us to work together on recovery to make sure that we are generous and not stingy, and I am sure that Townsville will bounce back. It's got great local leadership, it's got a great sense of community. I salute again the ADF and all of the emergency services and all the volunteers. A final point I'd like to make is to all of the blue collar workers and the people perhaps who don't get all the plaudits when the dust settles, or when the waters recede. But a lot of the people - the volunteers, the council workers, the emergency service people, they live in this town and their own houses may have been damaged, indeed flooded. But in Townsville everyone turned up to work and looked after each other. So there's some really great lessons for the rest of the country from what we've seen in Townsville and I congratulate them. Happy to take any questions,
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that the insurance companies will step up? Because obviously there are people in the Whitsundays who still haven't received their claims after Cyclone Debbie, and is there anything that the government can do to, I guess speed it up?

SHORTEN: Thank you. Sometimes insurance companies do the right thing and sometimes they don't. I dealt with them in sort of, almost hand to hand combat over the Brisbane floods where they were relying on technical definitions of floods to get out of paying insurance. They've been a lot better since then, and in my experience some of the locally based Queensland insurers certainly have a greater appreciation - and that's my personal view, of the local circumstances. But recently I was down in Proserpine, I've been to Airlie Beach, some of the insurers there are still dragging their feet. What we will do is between Cathy O'Toole and Belinda Hassan and myself, we will monitor the situation. We invite people who are having concerns with their insurance claims to contact us. The Federal Parliament carries a big stick and we won't be afraid to use it, as I have in the past with the insurers and the financial services. You know, you've just had a Banking Royal Commission. People are watching the financial services industry very carefully. I'm not saying the insurers will do the wrong thing, but you really wouldn't want to now.

JOURNALIST: You just said the Federal Government was penny-pinching with the additional $1000 top ups and $400 per child. What do you think would be adequate?

SHORTEN: Well what I mean by that is not the amount, but I mean that we're hearing reports that people are getting you know, legalistic brush-offs. We hear reports, and I've met people, they might have apartments next to each other and a set of townhouses and one person gets the funding and the other doesn't. I mean let's be clear, I think sure it's very clear if you've had water across the floorboards and 25 per cent your house is damaged you get it. But can I also be clear, if you've had the power off for three days and all your food is spoiled, if you've had to evacuate your premises, well it seems like you're in distress and you need some short term help. How can it be that you get flooded out -  the Commonwealth Government has a disaster relief payment, you're out of pocket for paying for the rentals. You know, you've got to couch surf for a number of days. This is the Federal Government of Australia, they seem to find money for TV advertising, they could find some money I think, just to make sure that they take a reasonable view. I've seen it all before from bushfires to floods. What I am saying is not radical, it's just sensible. People have already got enough challenges rebuilding, do they really have to be battling the Federal Government as well?

JOURNLAIST:  Is the amount enough though, people have been spending more on accommodation out of their home since Thursday last week. They've spent more than $1000 just to put themselves up.

SHORTEN: Well you're right. The amount to some people around Australia may sound generous, but it's not a king's ransom is it? But first of all what I would like to do is get that money out to people, you know if you have got a house which is infested by mold - sure the water might not have come across your floorboards, but if you're going to spend you know, if you've got mould in every room, you've got kids living here, you can't. What if someone's an asthmatic, you don't want the kids getting asthma. So I would just say to the Federal Government, forget the fine print just get this money and that'll be good for Townsville. These people aren't making some sort of arbitrage profit. The money which they give people will be spent in the local community, which is important for local business isn't it?

JOURNALIST: Just on another matter, do you support the Phelps Bill or the Government’s changes to medical transfers, and does Tim Wilson have a conflict of interest?

SHORTEN: Okay two questions on two distinct matters. Listen, the government I think is starting to do a backflip. They may be doing it because they don't want to lose a vote in Parliament, but I'm not going to be a purist, if they get to an acceptable outcome I'm not going to judge their motivation. Labor said that we want to make sure that independent medical advice is taken more seriously. If you or I are sick we go to the doctor, we take their advice, we don't get the advice of a bureaucrat in the Department of Home Affairs on how to treat that illness do we? And I think we've got to maintain some sort of common sense here. So we will have a look at what the Government's proposing. The way they normally communicate with me is either through the media or angry threatening letters. But despite that, I will not be deterred. We will see if it works, we’ll then have a look at it, but this stage we're still supporting the Phelps amendments.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten -

SHORTEN: But there was a second question that he asked. If you want to go to this I will come back to Mr Wilson's activities.

JOURNALIST: Just on that, the Prime Minister made some comments saying it would allow paedophiles, rapists, murderers into the country. What's your position on that?

SHORTEN:  He should be ashamed of himself. That is just complete rubbish. The fact of the matter is that people who have done those crimes don't get the refugee status, unless the government has missed them when they assess them as refugees. So that's just complete rubbish. The idea that somehow because you're a Liberal you dislike those crimes more than if you're someone else, I just get sick of that moral superiority and finger pointing. The real issue here - no one wants those people in this country, no one. I don't, and I don't think Mr Morrison does, no one does. But you know, going that gutter approach is unbecoming to the office of Prime Minister. What we need to do is get back to the serious issue here, the real issue, which is if we have people in our care albeit on Nauru and Manus, and if you've got treating doctors who say they need to get urgent medical treatment in Australia, and that's what we do, we need to have a process where that advice gets given the priority that it should. We'll work this issue through with the government. The crossbench have got a proposal which at this stage is the one we support. But we'll have a look at what the government is saying.

JOURNALIST: But -

SHORTEN: If I can go back - oh sorry, is this about the medical transfers?

JOURNALIST: Yeah, yeah, the Prime Minister's comments – what do you make of it. He said that he'd ignore the outcome of the vote if the government loses?

SHORTEN: Well for a man who says he'll ignore the outcome of the vote, he seems to be spending an awful lot of time thinking about the outcome, doesn't he? The reality is this is a government who has long since given up governing. I mean, if you've got a Prime Minister who says that he doesn't care what Parliament says, well then why are we waiting to have an election in another three months. I mean it's a democracy. You're not in government if you can't control the Parliament. People should be aware, you know - we've got a whole lot of Queenslanders cleaning up after the floods, they're going to work. But imagine being led by a government who only wants to sit in Parliament for 10 days in eight months, that is just hopeless. So this bloke can say all he likes that he's, you know, he doesn't care. Well for a bloke who doesn't care, he seems to spend a lot of time talking about it doesn't he? Just going back to your question about a fellow - which Mr Wilson the financial services booster or the MP. I just I didn't quite -

JOURNALIST: I'm sorry (inaudible).

SHORTEN: Okay. No, it's ironic because would you believe the Liberal MP and the guy who is criticising Labor have the same surname and are distantly related. The issue which I understand - you couldn't write it, could you? The issue here is that audio recordings seem to have emerged. It's been reported in the media that one of the key critics of Labor's tax reforms is timing his investor road shows - because he's a man who works in financial services, to conveniently coincide when his government allies are holding hearings to try and argue against these tax reforms. Now I think it smells. I think it doesn't pass the sniff test. We're going to get to the bottom of this. It is remarkable that in the week that the Banking Royal Commission has been handed down, it emerges that members of the LNP Government in Canberra are colluding with financial service interests to try and undermine Labor's proposals for a fairer tax system in this country. It smells, we're not going to leave it lie.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly on another matter, in light of the news about Huang Xiangmo  today, will Labor consider paying back donations from him?

SHORTEN: Well, we stopped taking money from him a couple of years ago. In fact, Labor stopped taking donations from that gentleman and another person before the law caught up with our position. So for a number of years we haven't dealt with this man.
JOURNALIST: I believe under the law though he's still able to continue making donations as long as he is a permanent resident?

SHORTEN: Under the Labor Party I lead - I didn't wait for the law. We've said that we won't take donations from him and another person, full stop, and haven't well in advance of the current government.

JOURNALIST: Just back to the floods. Are you confident that B.O.M's forecast were accurate and I guess, up to speed enough?

SHORTEN: Well there's plenty of people in this building more competent to judge that, but one thing which I will say is that having listened to Townsville's remarkable Mayor Jenny Hill, talk about some of the preventative and preemptive steps they took to accurately measure rain, I think Jenny and the council here and the leadership here put Townsville in the best possible position to try and deal with what is a once in 100 year crisis. So in terms of B.O.M, we're going to ask some further questions and not interested in allocating blame, but I want to make sure that communities around Australia have the best, most timely data to make decisions. You know what's amazing about what happened up here and I find it extraordinary, is that in the space of three days, there were 163 communications with the locals. That's awesome. That just gives people a chance to be able to evacuate, to get out ahead. You can't do that without people thinking about it in advance and without the most timely information. Just for the benefit of other Australians who weren't here, the amount of water at its peak coming out of that dam was 3,600 olympic swimming pools every hour. The equivalent of an olympic swimming pool was busting out of the dam, through the gates, every second. You can't imagine that sort of water. It's something like the whole of Sydney Harbour in three days. So what could have gone wrong - I mean a lot has happened which is bad for people, but I just wonder how bad it would have been. So what I've learned out of this visit is we want to properly fund the Bureau of Meteorology. And this is where I think Labor has a different approach to the role of government to the conservatives. We don't view government as something to be just salami sliced and cut, contracted out, casualised and downsized. Australians need quality services and they need quality services in their local regions. So you know, I think that there's a lesson here; do we want to have the world's best meteorology service or the world's best tax deductions? Do we want to have the best hospitals in Australia or do we want to have the best tax loopholes in Australia? Do we want to have the most deregulated labour market and casualised workforce or do we want to have well-funded regular public servants?
JOURNALIST: And just quickly one last question from a colleague. Will you definitely vote for Ms Phelps' medical transfer bill?

SHORTEN: Gee, I don't think I could have been much clearer. We're going to consider what the Government have said, because despite their insults and their carry on and you know - on one hand, they sort of try and blackmail us and say that if you don't vote for it everything will happen – terrible, and then they also say but they don't really care how we vote. We will consider what they're saying because I do believe that there is now a movement in their position from what they were saying at the end of last year. But at this point, we're committed to the Phelps' amendments. What people want in Australia out of their politicians is when, you know, people are putting up an argument, you consider it. But I have to say in closing, whilst the function here today was about Townsville and understanding it, we did have the Banking Royal Commission earlier this week, and I just want to make clear to the current government - I think there is actually mounting concern in the days since the Banking Royal Commission, from the Australian people, the community that nothing's actually going to change. I think we've noticed that the banking CEOs all seem to be buckling down to keep their jobs. We saw the share prices of banks go up. What this tells me is that the stock market has factored in perhaps business as usual for our banks. What the Government need to do is to sit for more days of Parliament before the next election and start implementing the Banking Royal Commission, because I think there is the chance of that Australian people will start to get disillusioned yet again that nothing's changing. And I say to the government, either you fix the banking industry now or we will after the next election, if we get elected. But we're not going to allow you to do nothing, the banks to act as business as usual, everyone goes on and says, well there's nothing that can be done, because I think the Australian people have been shocked by the Banking Royal Commission, and we're going to make it a clear issue at the next election. If this government doesn't do anything, we're going to put to the Australian people, who do you trust to keep our banks honest? The government who backed them in 26 times, who voted against a Royal Commission, or the Labor Party who keeps fighting for consumers.

SHORTEN: Thanks -

JOURNALIST: One last question about the floods.

SHORTEN: Okay.

JOURNALIST: When asked about climate change and the floods, Scott Morrison said he didn't want to talk about politics. What's your response to that?

SHORTEN: I think Mr Morrison is a politician. So when a politician says they don't want to talk about politics, you've got to be a bit skeptical, don't you? Listen, this is about dealing with a flood. I understand that people's minds are on the recovery, you know, we're not fully out of the woods. We get that there's plenty to be done. People are dealing with everything from the carpets, to the insurance, to the shock, to the loss. But more and more we're seeing Australia, the community, understands we're being subject to extreme weather events. I'm not saying that you blame climate change for all of this, but how many extreme weather events, how hot does it have to get before the Government will start to at least offer some real policies on climate change? Thanks, everybody.

MIKE KELLY, MEMBER FOR EDEN MONARO: Well G'day everyone, thanks very much for coming here to beautiful Moruya on our fantastic South Coast. We're very lucky to have with us here today the Federal Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten, and also the Federal Opposition Leader Michael Daley, sorry the State Opposition Leader Michael Daley who has come here and doing a great job for us to really make sure that we have a great competitive campaign in New South Wales. But also with us here today, we have three candidates locally that are working closely together, all pulling on the same oars to get things done for this region. We have Leanne Atkinson, the great candidate for Bega and of course Fiona Phillips who is the candidate for Gilmore. Strong, intelligent women, I hope you notice as well, a very stark contrast to our opponents. Look, it is wonderful to be here today because we have some great news and this news that we'll shortly mention builds on a fantastic record in health delivery in this region by state and federal Labor governments. Essentially we have seen a new regional hospital, the south east regional hospital in Bega, $170 million, we've seen $14 million in Eurobodalla delivered for a various range of primary health care facilities, including $700,000 for the Queen Street medical practice. We've seen $12 million going to the Moruya Hospital here for 20 transitional care beds which also enable us to upgrade the oncology unit. We've seen a great investment in Aboriginal health services in the region with mobile dental facilities and rescuing the Katungul service as well. So it's a tremendous record that’s delivered across the spectrum of primary health care, dental  health care, mental health for the first time in the region, and in relation to those critical services that are needed locally in terms of pathology and scanning and other services. So that's what's needed here not just a tick in the box affair. It needs that full range of services and in particular rural and regional people need local mental health services. So it's extremely exciting to see Labor working together at the state and federal level to deliver what we need here and in an earlier time frame than that's currently being contemplated. So it's great to have you here guys, really fantastic for Fiona, Leanne, and myself, and we look forward to seeing the delivery of this wonderful proposal. Thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much. Thanks Mike. I'm really pleased to be here with my friend Michael Daley announcing better health care services for the south coast of New South Wales. I congratulate in particular Fiona Phillips our candidate in Gilmore, and Leanne Atkinson the state candidate in Bega for the hard work they've done in liaising with Catherine King our Shadow Health Minister to get the announcement we're about to make delivered. I am pleased therefore to announce that if federal Labor is elected in three months as the next government of Australia, we will invest $25 million in the Eurobodalla hospital development. This makes it a total of $200 million, and I know Michael will be talking more about state Labor's exciting contribution. I had the privilege just before of attending a local medical surgery. Dr Holland was explaining to me along with the very capable midwives we met there, they were explaining to us the needs in this area. I'm pleased to say to the community here and the 3,000 who've got involved to sign the petition - we are listening to you. We're listening to the local clinicians, we're listening to the local nursing staff, we are listening to the local people of this community and you can only do that of course when you've got a local candidate who knows the area. We want to make sure that when people and families are dealing with a loved one who has got a challenging mental illness, that they can get the care here. Dr Holland explained to me the remarkable statistics, that 75 percent of the people with these conditions have to be treated outside the local area. Now we just make the odds harder against people recovering and getting the treatment when they have to travel away from family when they're dealing with all sorts of serious medical illnesses. But this is what a federal Labor government will do. We will choose better local hospitals over bigger profits for banks. We will choose the health care of Australians over subsidising tax loopholes for the very well off.  We choose the health of Australians. We think that there is no issue any more important, and that's why I'm pleased to now hand over to Michael Daley who is barnstorming the Opposition Leader of New South Wales, focusing on the health of everyone in New South Wales.

MICHAEL DALEY, NSW LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thank you so much Bill, it's great to join you on the campaign trail. This is the contrast of Labor in Australia against the Liberal Party. We've got a Prime Minister Scott Morrison and a Premier Berejiklian who don't want to touch each other  with a barge pole. They don't want to be  seen together on the campaign trail. You've got a Liberal Government in Canberra and a Liberal Government in New South Wales who don’t respect each other, who fight each other, who won't be seen together. No wonder it's up to Labor to come in and rescue communities and make announcements like we are today. So thank you, Bill. Bill's a friend of mine. We're not afraid to be seen together. In fact if Bill's the Prime Minister and I'm the Premier, you can look forward to a great era of cooperation between the Commonwealth and State Governments. I'm here with Bill today and these terrific candidates and MPs to make this announcement today. Premier Berejiklian is in Sydney today announcing an arrogant decision to press on with the $730 million demolition and rebuild of a stadium in the eastern suburbs of Sydney. So $730 million, three quarters of a billion dollars to knock down and rebuild a perfectly good stadium in Sydney. Bill and I, and the team are here today to announce $200 million for regional health in New South Wales. That says everything about Liberal priorities. It talks about Labor's commitment to health. People all over Australia, all over New South Wales know that when it comes to crucial services like health and education, Labor always delivers because we actually believe in it. They're not phoney commitments like the commitment that the Liberal government has made down here. It's not enough. When Fiona and Leanne have been door knocking, they've been told by residents it's not enough. This announcement today is about equality between Eurobodalla and Bega. The clinicians have said that they want equality. The petitioners have said they want equality and all the door knocking that's been done by these candidates has said the same thing. Leanne and Fiona, they've been described as terriers - two very strong Labor women, and I can tell you, Leanne has been driving me mad about this commitment, so we're here today to deliver for Leanne and the community down here. And I want to say thank you for everyone who worked this up, my Shadow Health Minister, Walt Secord, this is a great announcement - it's all about families in regional New South Wales, not stadiums in Sydney.

SHORTEN: Thanks Mike. Now, any questions about this exciting announcement or any other state or federal matters?

JOURNALIST: Bill do you think the federal government has invested enough in regional mental health services?

SHORTEN: No, I don't. I've got Catherine King here as well, I'll get here to supplement our answer. But the fact of the matter is that we're learning a lot more about mental illness, and gradually it's losing its stigma. But one of the things that I found in the 80 plus town hall meetings I've done all over Australia, is that it's difficult enough when there's an emergency, but there's some level of care. But straight after the immediate incident or immediate challenge,  the sub-acute area, it's just deficient in regional Australia. When you're battling mental illness or indeed addictions, you need to be in your own environment to help come through that. You need to be around people who love you and know you. At the moment in Australia under this government there is a exodus to the big cities of people if they can get treatment and that's not good enough. But I  might get Catherine to briefly supplement on some of the other things we're doing in regional Australia on mental health.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Sure.Thanks very much Bill. There wouldn't be an emergency department that I visit around the country,  where the emergency physicians are saying to me that they have got people who are presenting with mental health problems in their emergency department that need assistance and they can't get either care in the community or care in sub-acute beds. We would like to obviously see the government spend much more on mental health. We'll have a fair bit to say about that obviously in the lead up to the next election. But when you've got the circumstances where Headspace for example, have substantial waiting lists across the country, it is clear that early intervention services are well and truly needed. But when you've got a federal government that has cut, in this area alone, $5 million out of the public hospital system, you've got emergency physicians saying "we need help with patients who have mental illness", you've got to ask, why is this government so poorly funding our public hospitals to actually deal with the services that we need in this community.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Eurobodalla readers will be delighted to hear this announcement but one of the things that brings people to hospital regularly here is car accidents on the Princes Highway. Will a Shorten Labor government commit to an 80-20 funding agreement with whatever New South Wales Government we have - to make provide for dual carriageway (inaudible)?


SHORTEN: He's taking the Blue Highway. First of all, I am familiar with the road needs of South Coast New South Wales. My family and I had the opportunity over any number of years to come up here for our holidays. And I remember it was only a day or two, in fact, it might have been while I was staying further up the coast here at Bawley Point, that we had that terrible fatality with Jessica Falkholt and her family. That was shocking and I was very pleased and I got my Shadow Minister Anthony Albanese to sign a commitment to work with the current government. I think the Deputy Prime Minister McCormack signed it for the government. So, we do think there is a case to be made for a fair go. In terms of our record, we've got a good record I'll get Mike to supplement that in a moment. If we want to get things done like roads, like safety, like hospitals then we've got to be able to pay for our promises. So one way I can say not only will we work with the Liberals to help see greater investment in the roads in the manner in which you ask. I can pay for my promises. I can pay for my promises because we are going to make multinationals pay their fair share of tax in Australia. We are going to make sure that we close some of the unsustainable loopholes where property investors are favoured over first home buyers in our housing market. But I might get Mike to talk a bit further about our record and our ongoing commitment. And of course, I've got the future Premier of New South Wales here and he is very motivated on this question.

JOURNALIST: Okay the Falkholt crash made national headlines, we would love to invite you down to our office where we can show you a story map of all of the crashes that happened on the highway in 2018, you are always welcome, we would love you to come.

KELLY: The Princes Highway has been victim of a large number of accident zones and chokepoints and this is something that's always been the focus of our Labor candidates and myself over the years. So it was Labor that committed the money, the $60 million dollars that did the Bega Bypass as part of the Princes Highway. It was Michael Daley, this bloke right here, who I sat down with as the Infrastructure Australia process was rolling for the Princes Highway to say, well if that doesn't come through he was going to commit to doing Victoria Creek, Dingmans Creek chokepoints. Very dangerous parts of the Princes Highway and he followed through on it, he put money in the bank for that to get done. So that work we have seen done on Victoria Creek and Dingmans Creek is thanks to Michael Daley when he was the Roads and Transport Minister.

JOURNALIST: Everyone's grateful but we've had three head-ons near the Rail turn off in the six months from July to December.

KELLY: So to follow on, it is always going to be our ambition to continue that work, to continue working towards those objectives for the Princes Highway. We're fortunate now we can work with the Canberra joint regional organisation made up of the local councils, who prioritise the order of road works for us to inform the political processes. Right now, they've stuck the Barton Highway at the top of that list. So we will continue to work with the councils on their priorities, but it will always be the focus of Labor Governments who have been the ones who have invested and put skin in the game on the Princes Highway and great results will be seen right across this region.

JOURNALIST: Bill, some questions from Canberra.

SHORTEN: Sure.

JOURNALIST: Do Ken Henry and Andrew Thorburn need to resign?

SHORTEN:  Well, that's based upon the Royal Commission - let me just answer about the Royal Commission first because I haven't said anything yet since it came out yesterday and then I'll go to your specific point. I think I'm like millions of Australians I'm just furious at what I'm reading. Once upon a time a bank and a bank manager was regarded as the stamp of good housekeeping. The bank manager was known in the community, they'd be the referee for the kids going for the jobs. But in the last 20 and 30 years and we've seen most recently in recent years, the corporate profit motive of banks has overwhelmed the interests of putting people first. And what we see is a complete indictment of Australia's banking system. What we see is that some corporations have got very rich. Made big profits and bonuses and very high wages have been paid to people at the very top. What I think about when I saw that Royal Commission yesterday, is I think about the tens of thousands of victims. There'll be small businesses, there'll be retirees, there'll be individuals, there'll be farmers even here, and around this district who've been let down by their banks merely because the banks pursued profit over people. So, first of all, I just want to say this is a day which Australia's banks should be ashamed of. And almost as ashamed as the banks should be the current government. They did everything to cover up and protect the excesses of the banks. They made a conscious choice to back the big banks with their tax cuts and to vote 26 times against a Banking Royal Commission. They made a choice to pick the banks over the people. I'm sorry for the victims and I'm sorry that it took as long as it did. But I'm actually proud that the Labor Party withstood the pressure of both Turnbull and now the current fellow. They abused us, they attacked us, the big banks said that somehow it was class warfare to want to have a Banking Royal Commission. Well, the result came in yesterday and the banks and their political arm the Liberal National Government of Australia - they deserve to hang their heads in shame. And now the government is saying well trust us to implement the Banking Commission's findings, really? You can't - you couldn't trust the current government to have a Banking Royal Commission and you certainly can't trust them to implement the findings of the Banking Royal Commission. I mean and as for the banks themselves, now I think some of the senior people there do need to consider their positions. I regard this Banking Royal Commission as an absolute day of disgrace for the banks and their friends in the government and I think a lot of Australians will be saying, how can some of these people on the boards of the bank who have been there - I'm not saying someone who's turned up in the last year or two - but some of those longer serving board members. Some of those executives at the top who've been around as all of this is happening. It's not good enough for them to say sorry, or I won't take long service leave, or I'll hand back 10 percent of a million dollar bonus. That's not good enough. So I think that this government has a task in front of it and the nation has, it's to implement the Royal Commission. But I have to say to Australians, this Banking Royal Commission report is now a big issue for the next federal election which is due in about three months’ time. Now I'm saying to Australians, who do you trust to keep the banks in line? The current government, who 26 times voted against a Banking Royal Commission or the Labor Party who against the odds from Opposition secured a Banking Royal Commission. But the job's not done yet. I say to the victims, we hear your concerns about compensation. I say to those senior bank executives who may feel because they haven't been specifically named or no charges laid immediately out of the Commission - you are not out of the woods yet and I don't say that our of any vindictiveness, but the fact that hundreds of millions of dollars of people's money was squandered. Dead people having their accounts serviced, people charged for no services, there's been a massive breach of trust and I don't think the Australian people will be satisfied now having had some of the extent of the wrongdoing revealed. I don't think they're going to be satisfied with anything less than some of these executives considering their position and the government needs to absolutely, absolutely recall parliament. I mean we are due to sit for two weeks but I am putting a challenge today to Mr Morrison. You are only sitting for two weeks because you know the whole show is falling apart. For the election, you've said it's not for another three months. Let's table another couple – let’s schedule another couple of weeks of Parliament. The job is there to be done. What this government wants to do is say "there's no time to do anything about this before the election" and then they hope to win the election and then guess what everyone? Nothing will happen if this mob get re-elected. If you want honesty out of the banks you don't ask the people who presided over it to give them a second chance. Time is up Mr Morrison. The very least you can do to salvage part of your reputation, because no one is going to forgive you for stopping the Royal Commission, is at least schedule another couple of weeks. I challenge Mr Morrison, a couple more weeks of parliament, it's not as if you've got anything else to do and let's get on and start implementing the Royal Commission putting consumers first.

JOURNALIST: The Coalition is taking action on all 76 recommendations. Are both parties on the same ticket here? Are the differences between you really that big?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, let's start with the Royal Commission. Difference? The difference is between daylight and moonlight, daylight and night-time. Mr Morrison attacked me personally and said that having a Banking Royal Commission was nothing but a "whinge". 26 times they voted against it. I'm going to say something I never thought I'd ever say - let alone even think. Even Mr Turnbull this morning said sorry for not calling the Royal Commission earlier. I never thought I'd find someone softer on banks than Mr investment banker Prime Minister Turnbull but now we have. He's called Mr Morrison. What is it with these Libs? They protected the banks uphill and down dale. Imagine if they had got their way and we didn't have a Banking Royal Commission? The rip offs and the rorts, and the vested interests, they'd that still be laughing all the way to their profits. But because of Labor that didn't happen. But now, this Government: one, can't apologise for getting it wrong and that isn't enough though by the way. Two, they've got to make sure that the people who've been running these banks face the full consequences of their civil and potentially criminal mistakes. You know, I do say to Mr Morrison, just say sorry. But that won't be enough - if you're fair dinkum about being sorry, then what we do is we schedule another two weeks of Parliament in March and we make sure we start implementing the recommendations of the Royal Commission. If this Government can't reconvene parliament for March, if they can't say sorry, if they can't stop calling for senior directors to consider their position, they haven't learned a lesson and I ask the Australian people of the election, who do you trust to keep the banks honest? The Liberals who wanted to cover it up or Labor who wanted to see the truth?

JOURNALIST: If you follow through on changes to mortgage broking, will you be limiting competition in the market?

SHORTEN: First of all, we got the recommendation yesterday and we said we're committed to implementing the recommendations. My Shadow Treasurer said we'll set up an implementation taskforce. We'll work through with all these people and all the various stakeholders. I say to the various stakeholders, we will listen to you. But we know that everyone's got to lift their socks and that without a doubt, is the conclusion of the Royal Commission. What we won't do is put the Royal Commission in a drawer, on a shelf, let it gather dust and ignore it. This Royal Commission shows the failure of trust between the banking sector and Australians. And I repeat, the banks today should be ashamed of themselves by their behaviour and the Government should be almost as ashamed by its behaviour, trying to cover up the scandalous behaviour of the banks.
JOURNALIST: Do you still have confidence in APRA and ASIC?

SHORTEN: I think that the regulators haven't come out of this unscathed. Now, I know that the Government cut funding to the regulators. There's always a government cut somewhere in the problem here, isn’t there? They can't help themselves the Libs. They're always cutting back on the watchdogs that look after their mates. The Royal Commission's recommended these people look at it. I accept that's the first way to go. But I think that the boards of the banks shouldn't breathe a sigh of relief. And I think the regulators are going to have to come up with some pretty good work. There was a lot of evidence was out there in the Royal Commission, wasn't there? There was just so much evidence saying of wrongdoing. I think this will be the test for the regulators. Do they just wave through the breaches or do they actually prosecute it with the teeth and reflecting the fury of the Australian people at being cheated so shamelessly in financial terms by people to whom we'd all been grown up and told to trust.

JOURNALIST: Bill, onto a different topic here. Now that you have had time to consider it, what recommendations for the Murray Darling Basin Royal Commission would Labor commit to?

SHORTEN: We haven't finished with our considerations on that. I think everyone's been shocked this summer in particular by the scenes of the fish kills. Now, the problem's in our biggest river system are much deeper and greater than that. But how much of an ecological disaster does one government need to wake up to itself? We’ve asked the Australian Academy of Scientists, after I couldn't get the current Government to do anything in January, to provide us a report. They've indicated to me that I'll have a preliminary report before Parliament resumes. They've got Australia's best experts and then they'll give me the final report a week later. What is pleasing - and which I'm not sure people are aware of - is that the River Authority have agreed to make available, previously unavailable data which will enhance the work of our scientists. I do make this remark in passing, though. How did it come to be that the Opposition in Australia has to write to the Academy of Scientists to get the report, to negotiate the provision of data? I mean, what is this Government for if it's not to look after these issues? That's why I think Parliament needs to resume too. We've got to have a discussion and we'll work together. You know the Murray Darling Basin shouldn't be a political football between the Government and the Opposition -  and I'm prepared for it not to be. I've said any report we get, we will make available to the Government straight away, names of the scientists, there will be no redacted bits, no sensitive things in it. We just want to get the facts out on the table. This Government's got to stop being a part-time government. We saw it again when the former prime minister made a brief appearance where he's expressed some goodwill towards the Independent running against the current Minister for Health. This is a divided government. The reason why they're not scheduling parliament is that they've effectively stopped governing in Australia. Well there's two big bits of work for them: the Banking Royal Commission, the Murray-Darling Basin - saving that and we could all work on that together. But the Government's got to stop scheduling phantom hearings when they know they can have an election and turn up and do their day job. Imagine people in Moruya, anywhere on the South Coast, saying to their boss at the beginning of this year: listen, I've been thinking about it and I don't really like every aspect of my job so I can come to work 10 days in eight months? This is a hopeless mob and their time is up.

JOURNALIST: On another subject, will you vote for the Phelps bill on medical help for asylum seekers when it comes to the House?
SHORTEN: That's our position. The Government wrote to me yesterday. I will say this, that the Government for the first time seems to be getting the message that when you've got refugees in your care, the view of the treating doctors should be treated more importantly than bureaucrats. So they have said that they want to look at it. We'll have to study what they're saying. We'll work with the Crossbench, we will listen to the Government. That's the way politics should operate. But I'm not convinced that when it comes to the health of anyone in our care that a bureaucrat in the Department of Home Affairs is better placed to judge that person's health than a treating medical doctor and specialist.

JOURNALIST: Well Labor supported it in the Senate so presumably it will be supported in the Reps?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I'd just refer you to the previous answer I gave.
JOURNALIST: What about the Morrison offer to have independent doctors make assessments as an alternative?
SHORTEN: I mean, it's a back-flip from the Government. I don't know if they have done it because they've had a change of heart and want to treat people well or if because they're worried about losing a vote in the House. But politics is the art of the imperfect. So, I don't care what reason they've got for modifying their position, we'll have a look at that. We've said independent medical doctors, their views should be considered. So we'll see what common ground there is. But again, I just say to the Government - if you look at it as a club to try and beat the head of the Opposition before an election and scare people about boats, well then that's your political strategy. For me, it's not about that. It's about if we have people in our care, how do we make sure they're treated properly. The boats - we're going to stop them and turn them around, we'll have regional resettlement. This is a Government addicted to scaring Australians. Yet when it comes to banks, when we see some truly scary behaviour, they go missing in action. Thanks, everybody.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about allegations (inaudible) yesterday, New South Wales Labor had to quarantine $100,000 in donations?

SHORTEN: Well, I've got Michael Daley, the head of New South Wales Labor. I will just remind everyone, we said we wouldn't accept any foreign donations two years ago – the best part of two years ago. So, you know, this Government is still addicted to taking money from foreign sources, it was only when legislation was passed recently. I also think if this Government believes in electoral transparency, I want to give them a tip which is what the electorate think: if someone's giving a political party a donation of over  $1,000, we deserve to know who they are. This Government doesn't support that. So I think there's some improvements we can make. But Michael, he acted very swiftly yesterday I have to say - very swiftly and decisively. And I might let him now finish off and explain what he did. Thank you very much everybody.

JULIE COLLINS, MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN: It's great to be here with my colleague Senator  Catryna Bilyk but particularly to have our Leader Bill Shorten here in Tasmania and particularly here in the Huon Valley. As Tasmanians would know, people here in the valley and indeed people right across Tasmania have been doing it very tough in the last couple of weeks. These fires have been unrelenting, but I want to go on the record today to thank all of the volunteers, the local government and particularly our fire service for the wonderful job that they have been doing in containing these fires. It's been an extraordinary time in Tasmania, and Tasmanians have come together like I've never seen before. It's extraordinary to go to the evacuation centres to talk to locals about the community effort and it's wonderful to have Bill down here directly to talk to locals about how it's impacting them, how it's impacting their day to day lives, how it's impacting businesses, how it's impacting the local community. Bill has a history here doing some of the recovery with the Victorian bushfires as that terrible anniversary comes up. He knows what comes next. He knows how difficult it can be for local communities and it's wonderful that he's taken time to come to Tasmania today and particularly to come down to the Huon Valley. Thank you Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you Julie Collins, local member for the Huon Valley and I'm also accompanied by Senator Catryna Bilyk. First of all I just want to say to Tasmanians, that the rest of Australia is aware of the fires that you've been fighting, and not just in the Huon Valley but in the Central Highlands and north western Tassie. And you are not forgotten, and that was a great honour for me today actually to come and meet the professionals, to meet the volunteers, the Tasmanian Fire Service, the people who work in the recovery centre and most importantly day to day Tasmanians who have been under a real degree of stress. As Julie said today is a day where there's going to be the anniversary event in Melbourne for ten years since the terrible Black Saturday fires. I'll never forget that 173 lives were lost in that terrible horrendous day and evening 10 years ago, and that's why, I have to say, I'm so impressed by how Tasmanians have responded to this immediate fire emergency. People realised, that it had been under way for the best part of three weeks, that a lot of Tasmania has been experiencing fire danger and not just in remote parts but coming right up to where people live. To be honest it's nothing short of a minor miracle that only three properties have been confirmed as being destroyed. But what I also recognise is that for a lot of businesses and for a lot of people who haven't been able to go home, this has been very stressful. It's not easy for a mum and a dad to say to their kids when they're out of home for 13 or 14 days that they are going to have to keep waiting a little longer. What I understand from speaking to the experts -  and I congratulate the local councils and all levels of government - is that the immediate danger has receded, but it's not over and that there'll be a lot of vigilant and diligent watching of fires and hazardous areas between now until the end of the fire season. I just want to reassure Tasmanians I'm here today because I want to make sure that you get your fair share. You pay your taxes to Canberra, and really, when there's a time of disaster that's when you want to see reinvestment. To the businesses in particular the small businesses not just in the Huon valley but in other parts of Tasmania, you've had an interruption to your income now in some cases for two weeks. This is stressful. Please keep in touch with Julie Collins. I've said that I want the Prime Minister to bring the cheque book on behalf of the Government, now is not the time to be stingy or bureaucratic. I've seen fire recovery and reconstruction before, all over Australia, now is not the time for government to go missing. A lot of people have been running on adrenaline just making sure they're safe, and as the immediate emergency hopefully decreases in level of warning, I think a lot of people might hit the wall and it will be a tough time. If you need help, you should ask for help. I'd just say to Tasmanians, my fellow Australians,  you have been through a lot of stress,people react to stress in different ways and it can come up and affect them at different times. There's no embarrassment in seeking help and getting support and I know the services are there. We're happy to take - I should also say before I move to questions I don't think anyone in Australia can be unaware of the terrible situation unfolding in Townsville in the last 48 hours. The fact that the Ross River Dam has  had a structured release of water, when it was 200 per cent at capacity, has just meant that a lot of water has gone over the floorboards of a lot of households in Townsville - this is massive and unprecedented inundation. And my thoughts are with the residents of Townsville and the surrounding areas who are going through flood, just as this part of Australia has been going through fire. And of course I'm conscious in my home state of Victoria, there's at least four fires, some of which are getting close to houses. This has been a season of extreme weather events and I want to say to Australians on behalf of the Labor Party, we've got your back - we want to make sure you're looked after, not just now, but in the coming days and weeks and months.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten we do have an update that an additional two properties have been burned down by the Riveaux Road fire, and we've also got three affected by the Central Plateau, so that now brings the total number of houses lost in these fires to eight. What is your message to people (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: At one level obviously, the blessing is that no one's died, and that is a blessing. You can always rebuild a house, but if you lose someone you lose them forever. But having said that property damage and losing your house is quite a catastrophic event. So to people who have lost their property, first of all I hope you're insured and if you have any struggles with your insurance company please feel free to contact my Members of Parliament. This is now a time for insurance companies not to be tough and be bean counters, but be compassionate - that's why people take insurance for.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Green's Senator Nick McKim said that the Prime Minister's love affair with coal has worsened the fires and he should get on his hands and knees and sit there and apologise. What are your thoughts?

SHORTEN: Well I might just finish the point about the property, then I will come to the latest contribution from the Greens. So it's not just the insurance, what I also say to people though is go and seek some help because when a house burns down, there's things you can never insure - the birth certificates, the photos of your kids growing up, mementos, things you might have a great value on, they're your hobby, but no one else values. So I just say, go and get help. So with the insurers, get all the help you can and we're happy to help you deal with them. And to that deeper level of loss, we just say to you reach out and get some professional assistance. Turning to Senator McKim's latest contribution - I don't think that sort of click bait sensationalism helps anyone. There is a legitimate issue around climate change, but that click bait Green sensationalism smacks more of relevance deprivation and headline hunting than helping anyone whose house has burnt down or recognising what we've gone through. But I do think on a more sober and serious point, that there is a growing sense right across Australia that climate change is having at least some effect on our weather systems. Now I'm not blaming climate change for everything that happens, but I think even the most extreme climate deniers are probably at the point of acknowledging that we're having more and more extreme weather events, more and more weather records, new weather records are being set, and the economic cost is growing and growing and growing. So I think it is legitimate to talk about climate change - I mean if you can't talk about climate change now with the range of events we've got, when will we ever be allowed to talk about climate change, and when will this government start doing something about climate change?

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by the devastation to Tasmania's wilderness World Heritage area with these fires?

SHORTEN: Well obviously, my first concern is always people. I make no apology for that. Property damage is always catastrophic but you're right. Then there's the National Estate, the communal property of the nation which is of course our heritage areas. So this damage is difficult, it is devastating and I think in coming weeks and months we're going to need to see a greater effort from the government in terms of what they're going to do to help Tasmania regroup.

JOURNALIST: There have been calls for bringing in amphibious aircraft to get on top of those blazes. Is that something that Labor would consider? Or what would Labor do try to protect that environment if elected?

SHORTEN: Well, be it property, be it private property or be it World Heritage areas, I've got a lot of confidence in our firefighting officials. So I'm not here to come in as some sort of wise man from the mainland and second guess what's been happening. I've been pretty impressed. But I do think that we need to make sure that we have more resources in terms of mitigation and prevention of fire. We ask a lot of our firefighters and a lot of our relief agencies when disaster strikes. But what we've also got to make sure is that we're doing more in mitigation and prevention, and we've got to make sure that we're funding the remedial activities in the off season when the risk of bushfire is not so high, be it in fuel degradation, be it in making sure that we're properly resourcing our firefighting services working with the states. I mean the Commonwealth's been good at turning up after the disaster and helping out and that's part of our remit. But all too often I feel the Commonwealth leaves the funding of protecting our environment, providing the resources to the states till disaster strikes. We know that this will happen again. We know that there's a lot of - that the extreme weather events are increasing in frequency. So I think we need to have a serious discussion with our national fire prevention plans. Are we as a nation supporting our states, our local governments and our firefighters to do the work and ideally before disaster strikes.

JOURNALIST: We have seen a fairly really heavy reliance on interstate and international firefighters. Do you think we need more people actually on the ground here in Tasmania as well?

SHORTEN: Well again, I've only got nothing but praise for the firefighters. I do think that we need to incentivise or support our volunteers more. The volunteers don't do it for the money let me be clear on that and they would be offended if someone said you should pay them more money. But I do think we need to somehow improve and support employers who released their volunteers to go and fight fires. I mean it's, It's not unreasonable when someone has jury service initially the employer, might pick up a couple of days but after that the government helps the employer. So I say to all the small and big businesses who are out there providing and releasing your volunteers. Thank you. I get that we need to have a national conversation - how we can further encourage our employers to be able to release the volunteer firefighters so that they don't suffer any great financial disadvantage. But I want to return to where I started. Volunteers don't do it for remuneration. I understand that I respect that. But I also want to make sure that you know, we don't inadvertently rely so much on the goodwill that they suffer financial disadvantage. In terms of our full time firefighters, I've got a very simple rule, give them the best equipment in the world because that makes it only just good enough for them. The men and women in our fire service, they are excellent. They are the only people who can put fires out but I'd like to make sure they have the best technology possible.

JOURNALIST: Just on that note -

SHORTEN: -Sorry, I might share but I will come back to you.

JOURNALIST: Alright, just on that note, we have seen the fires burn through almost 190,000 hectares, and some of them have been going since before Christmas. Has it been an adequate response from the government to this point?

SHORTEN: I'm not here to judge the Tasmanian Government today, I'm here to visit. I'm here to say thank you to the volunteers, I'm here to say thank you to the professionals, here to acknowledge the work with the recovery centre. I'm also here to just reassure Tasmanians who have been in the Huon Valley and elsewhere that you're not forgotten and that I expect the Commonwealth Government to get the chequebook out because that's why people pay their taxes, to help the small businesses and help people who've been affected adversely by it. I don't think it would be appropriate of me just to wander in and start playing the political blame game, I think that turns people off. What I will do is take some of the insights and lessons that I've learned from the firefighting services here and how we can further improve national support for state firefighting bodies.

JOURNALIST: Are we likely to see an actual promise on that before the election then?

SHORTEN: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Could you tell us anything else about what that might include, when we might hear an announcement about it?

SHORTEN: We've been doing some work on this but I think it's better that we just come and visit today rather than sort of make it a big political carnival.

JOURNALIST: Can we move on to other issues.

SHORTEN: I am in your hands.

JOURNALIST: The medical review panel that the government is promising to establish to provide greater oversight of medical transfers from offshore processing. Would that alleviate your concerns about the issue?

SHORTEN: We will study the detail of what the government's dropped out to the media this morning. I understand the government's written to me, we'll study the detail. But what I will say is this, it is good if the government's showing signs of prioritising the view of treating doctors and the treatment of people within the care of Australia. That is a development because up until now they've been very stubborn about it. I am not sure though that they're doing it because they have got some insight about their obligations to people in their care. I think rather it's been announced because of the pressure of an impending vote in parliament. Hopefully there'll be more sensible negotiation and discussion from the government as they face the pressure of losing a vote in parliament. We're voting for the Phelps Bill, Labor is supporting the Phelps Bill. I encourage the government, they are showing some signs of ameliorating their very harsh position. Listen, whatever their motive is and I think it's mainly driven by a parliamentary vote next week, I'm prepared to look at the detail of it. For me what matters is not the reason why the government is trying to get to a better answer than it's given, to me what matters is the way we treat people who we have a duty of care to treat properly.

JOURNALIST: Does that mean you're not prepared to back the Government's changes in parliament?

SHORTEN: I've just said we've got to study the detail. The government gave them to the media then they sent us an e-mail overnight. That's fair enough how they communicate.

JOURNALIST: - You said  -

SHORTEN: Sorry, I might do you the courtesy of finishing your question. You've asked what we're going to do, I have said that we'll study the detail. It is a movement, the government is showing for the first time some signs of buying Labor's logic which is that we've got to put the treating doctors’ advice at the front of how we treat people in our care, but we're not sure, there's still a way to go. That's what the experts have told me this morning and the crossbench. We've said that we will vote for the crossbench resolution, we haven't changed our mind on that. I think the government's in the market for sensible negotiation. They could have done this months ago, of course, now they're facing a vote where they lose control of the parliament. That may be putting the pressure on them, that's up to them. For me what matters is what's effective. We want to deter people coming by boat. We will turn boats around. We will keep regional resettlement. We also want to make sure that people in our care are receiving proper medical treatment.

JOURNALIST: If the government does lose this vote in parliament, is that similar to almost a no-confidence vote going through against the government?

SHORTEN: Listen, in some ways the government's already cast a vote of no confidence in themselves. People may not be aware but the government outlined their parliamentary timetable. That's the number of days that they come to parliament to do their day job. Last December, or last November, they said that they would only be sitting for 10 days in eight months. Good luck to any of you in the media or any of the people we've seen in the Huon Valley,  if you could tell your employer "listen I've had a long hard think about it, I only want to turn up to work for 10 days in eight months". You would get the sack. So the very fact that this government is so scared of the parliament that they won't come to it for more than 10 days shows they don't have any confidence in themselves and I think the Australian electorate are forming the same view.

JOURNALIST: Will you withdraw the support for the Kerryn Phelps Bill if you like the detail in what the government is proposing?

SHORTEN: Well that's what I'd call a hypothetical question. So far I've said that we're supporting the crossbench resolution- as I have a couple of times here. I acknowledge the government is seeming to show some awareness and indeed they are moving towards our position that treating doctors should have a greater say and their views should be given a greater weight than they currently have been. Now we haven't seen enough of the detail to make us change our mind. If the government wants to have further sensible negotiation as they come closer to Labor's position we will study the detail. I think Australians expect that, I don't even care what the motivation of the government is if their motivation is just fear of losing a vote that's fine by me. What matters to me is the answer. What matters to me is that if we deter the people smugglers, we stop people coming here by boats, we have regional resettlement. But people in our care shouldn't be detained indefinitely and they should also receive proper and safe medical treatment. And if that means them coming to Australia so be it.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by the ICAC investigation into the potentially illegal donations to New South Wales?

SHORTEN: I'm not familiar with the circumstances of the investigation, I'll let that proceed. I might just make one comment about the Banking Royal Commission. I just want to say we'll find out later today what's in the Royal Commission. I just say first of all, to all of the victims of financial institutions - I'm sorry. I'm sorry that you weren't listened to earlier. You've been on a long journey. Today is a day of reckoning. It is a day of reckoning for the banks and financial institutions who've abused the trust of literally thousands of their customers, farmers, small business people. It is a day of reckoning for the government who shamefully voted 26 times to stop Labor's Banking Royal Commission. We look forward to seeing what the Royal Commission says. We are determined to see the victims and the consumers and people who believe in having an honest and ethical banking sector. We will keep being in their corner and we will make sure this government does not backslide on the banks, stops trying to give them a $17 billion tax cut. They spent two years and 26 votes to stop this Royal Commission Report today. I for one feel vindicated in Labor's position. Thanks everybody.

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: Bill Shorten, welcome

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, Barrie.

CASSIDY: That concern, that if you punish the banks in a certain way then credit might dry up, is that a reasonable thing to keep in mind when you decide on penalties?

SHORTEN: There they go again, the government. They already sound like they're backpedalling on making the banks accountable. Let's see what the report says. The reality is this a government that can always find an excuse not to do something to bring the banks in to heel. I mean is really what Mr Morrison is saying is that the only way that we can have a solid banking sector is an unethical banking sector? I don't buy that logic. But maybe that explains why the government voted 26 times against this banking royal commission, 26 times.  And basically the big economic plan the government has had for the last six years for Australia is to give the banks a 17 billion dollar tax cut.

CASSIDY: He wants an effective banking system, he doesn't want credit to dry up.

SHORTEN: Barrie, is this Liberal government, this protection racket for the banks scandals and rip-offs we’ve seen, are they really telling Australians that the only way that we can have a banking sector is to have an unethical banking sector? I don't buy that, nor do thousands of farmers and small businesses and people who have been ripped off by the banks. I for one have been shocked. I pushed for the banking royal commission against the government. They mocked me, they abused me but in the end we got our way. Now it sounds like the government is trying to say, "Well, maybe we need to have a bad banking sector to keep a banking sector." I don't buy that.

CASSIDY: So, do you commit to adopting all of the recommendations of the royal commission?

SHORTEN: We will in principle. I mean it would have to be a pretty amazing reason not to. I mean we saw that remarkable proof of life video where poor old Commissioner Hayne, who has done a great job, is sort of dragged out to try and give some faux credibility to a government who didn’t want to have a banking royal commission. I’m not going to let the government off the hook, they didn’t want this and now they are already trying to say ‘well maybe we need to have an unethical banking sector, we don’t want to go too hard against our friends in the banks.”

CASSIDY: You've come up with a recommendation of your own around the new protections for whistleblowers but it’s this financial incentive that’s thrown in as well. Why is that there?

SHORTEN: Well, we have a look around the world and the Americans have been able to make some big breakthroughs in some financial scandals by basically encouraging some of the people involved to be able to come forward and get a reward. What our plan means for people who are doing the wrong thing is that just be aware of the person next to you because they might just want the reward and not put up with corruption. I want whistleblowers to come forward. And also whistleblowers pay a big price. There’s a lovely fellow, Jeff Morris, he’s paid a big price for coming forward about the Commonwealth Bank and he has suffered great financial disadvantage. Are we a country who says we want people to sacrifice everything to expose illegality or corruption and then we punish them? Because what happens is when a whistleblower comes forward they get punished in many different ways after the event. We're trying to address the balance. I'm determined to make sure the big white-collar crooks, the top end of town, the next time someone cooks up a scheme to park a couple of hundred million dollars away from the eyes of the tax office, when mums and dads have to pay their taxes, we want to say to whistleblowers, ‘we’ve got your back.’

CASSIDY: But you talk about white collar criminals, and in this case that’s who you are targeting, and yet you oppose an ABCC in the area of industrial criminality.

SHORTEN: I think there is a bit of a difference there Baz. First of all, what we are saying is that in workplace relations, just one set of laws. Why do construction workers have to have a different set of laws to everyone else. It’s not fair. We oppose illegality wherever it is. But one of the weaknesses being that whistleblowers haven’t been rewarded.  What we're proposing today could apply in any workplace, any workplace.

CASSIDY: Couldn’t that be the risk though, the reward. It could be quite large, it could be as much as $200,000 in big cases - could that lead to vexatious claims?

SHORTEN: Well, if you think we're catching, if you think that we are hearing all of the insider deals that go on well I don’t share that view. Labor is going to pursue and make sure we restore faith in institutions, not just in the government. We've pushed the National Anticorruption Commission, we also want to make sure – and we pushed the banking royal commission. So we’ve been fair dinkum, our record is there. But we want to make sure that whistleblowers don't get punished. I don't believe in a system where we encourage whistleblowers but we then see them financially disadvantaged.

CASSIDY: I want to ask you about housing prices now, housing prices have gone up in Sydney and Melbourne by close to 10% in the last 12 months. There are predictions - have fallen by 10%. The predictions are they might fall by a similar amount or even more in the next 12 months. Is that a good thing or a bad thing?

SHORTEN: Well, prices go up and prices go down. It really depends if you're trying to buy or sell a house. I think the real issue the government has been getting at is they're trying to scare people about our sensible reforms to wind back taxpayer hand-outs to property investors.

CASSIDY: Because that might cause the house prices to fall even further?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all let's look at where the house prices have fallen. They've fallen under this government. This government wants people in Australia to forget that we have twin problems. One problem is that first home buyers don't get a fair deal. How is it fair that a couple in their 20s or 30s go along to bid for a house and they're competing against someone who is getting a taxpayer hand-out to buy the house as their sixth or seventh house? So that's just not fair. Everyone knows it's not fair. As usual with the Government if they're given a choice between standing up for ordinary Aussies or standing up for the vested interest, they picked the vested interest just like they’ve done with the banks. But the other issue is, if this government is saying and trying to scare people about our very modest proposals then what they are also doing is, they should take responsibility for the housing price falls on their watch. You never hear them do that do you. Somehow they want to scare you about stuff which even the treasury department says will only have a modest impact, but they want you to gloss over the fact that under this government our economy has underperformed, it hasn’t performed in the interests of working Australians.

CASSIDY: But will your changes to negative gearing mean that houses will be even cheaper?

SHORTEN: What our changes will mean is that it will be fairer, in terms of…

CASSIDY: But cheaper?

SHORTEN: I’ll come to cheaper in a second, first of all let’s deal with fair, this is the real reason we’re doing it. How is it fair, Barrie, that a couple have to compete to buy their first home with someone who is getting a taxpayer funded handout to buy their sixth or seventh home. In terms of the impact on prices, it will not have the negative impact that the people trying to promote and oppose our current scheme are saying. Absolutely not. Even Treasury, who as we know these days write reports for the government on their side, even they have said it will only have a modest impact.

CASSIDY: But by ‘modest impact’ it will cause a further decline in the price of houses.

SHORTEN: Oh no I don’t accept that, I accept that what we are doing is creating fairness.

CASSIDY: How can it not have that impact?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, the only way that you could follow the government’s logic is if you would stop investing in property in Australia. The reality is most people invest in property because it is a good deal. Some people do it to get a taxpayer handout. How is it fair, Barrie, that some people are able to access a taxpayer handout to buy their sixth or seventh house, and the rest of us or the rest of Australians can't.

CASSIDY: On the franking credit issue, you can see that it’s causing you more political harm because it's not grandfathered and you also can see that some of the people who will take the hit here are not wealthy.

SHORTEN: Well first of all, just on this issue of grandfathering, you are quite right, when it comes to negative gearing all of the people currently negatively geared will not be affected and you’ll still be able to negatively gear your houses…

CASSIDY: But that doesn't apply to the franking credit.

SHORTEN: Well the franking credits, that's still prospective. Without everyone being bored to tears about the issue, in 1987, Paul Keating introduced the scheme, basic principle of tax equity, he said you shouldn't pay tax twice. So a dividend that a person receives is taxed in the company, company tax, and then it used to be taxed as income tax, income tax. He removed the double taxation. But in 2001, John Howard and  Peter Costello, when they had more money than they knew what to do with, abandoned tax principals. And now we have a crazy situation where a taxpayer gets a credit, sorry a non taxpayer, get a cash tax refund. What principle of taxation says that a person who doesn't pay tax can get a cash tax refund? Let's open the textbooks - it doesn't exist.

CASSIDY: But it does exist and a lot of people have relied on it for a long time and you are copping some backlash over this - the government is making quite something of it - are you prepared to have another look at it?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, the reason why we're doing it is there is no principle that says it is fair that a non-taxpayer gets a tax refund, a cash tax refund. But it is also not fair that we're spending $100 million a week paying non-taxpayers cash tax refunds. It is not fair in this country that we're spending more money giving non tax payers a tax refund than we are on public schools. So we're not for turning. It really goes to a deeper point - this government has run out of governing. They don't even want to turn up to Parliament. They just want to scare people about our sensible reforms which are about making Australia fairer.

CASSIDY: When you say you're not for turning, there will be no tweaking of the policy at all?

SHORTEN: Well if I can put it really directly, do people want a government or do they want a piece of plasticine. Do people want a government with tax principles and fairness at their core or do they just want  a lump of political putty. We’ve had six years of the plasticine government and we are putting our views out because we want Australia to be fairer and we want it to operate in the interests of the millions of people who go to work every day, the pensioners. Did you know Barry, for example, that we're handing back bigger tax refunds to ten million Australians than the government’s currently offering...

CASSIDY: We're just go to a package and we will come back to you. We’ve got a bit of a problem in the studio.

CASSIDY: And just to explain what happened there, one of our cameramen had a bit of an episode. He seems fine but we've got an ambulance on the way. So Bill Shorten, if we could just round off the interview.  What I did want to ask you about throwing forward to the sitting fortnight you seem determined to put up the new measure to deal with unwell refugees on Nauru. Are you pursuing that and do you think you have the numbers?

SHORTEN: Well, we'll be pursuing it. It really depends on what sort of pressure the government has brought on the crossbenchers. I should say though that I am pleased the final children are off Nauru. And I do believe that if the crossbench, and the opposition, and some of the progressive Liberals hadn't pursued this, I do wonder if the children had been off. And I do also think it’s correct to say although he was my rival, former Prime Minister Turnbull, the American deal, which we backed in. So I am pleased with this development but we want to keep making sure that we treat people with a proper duty of care and with access to proper medical treatment.

CASSIDY: Because of that development though, do you think that will have an impact on the thinking of some of the crossbenchers, and I’m thinking Cathy McGowan in particular and she might now be satisfied with that and she won't then support the Labor initiative?

SHORTEN: Ms McGowan has always said she's concerned about all of the people in detention, not just the kids. But I’m not going to put any more pressure on her, I’ll leave that to the government. In terms of the sitting fortnight though, one thing which I’m determined to do is to hold the government to account to the fact that they have only scheduled 10 sitting days in eight months. As people come back from their Christmas holidays imagine if they go into their boss and say, "Listen, I've been thinking about it. I only want to come to work for 10 days in the next eight months." You’d get shown the door. And that’s really what I’m going to be saying to the government, turn up to work and schedule more sitting days. And if they don't do that I’ll say to the Australian people, "If you want a change in the government, then change the government."

CASSIDY: Thanks very much for coming in. I appreciate it.

SHORTEN: Thank you very much.


PAUL NEWBURY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BRISBANE: Hi everybody, welcome here. I'd like to welcome Bill Shorten back to Brisbane yet again. It seems like he's here every other week now. Bill's here to show Labor's support for the Cross River Rail project, and so Bill's going to say a few words in a moment, but Cross River Rail is one of the number one projects - infrastructure projects - in Queensland. It's been a priority (inaudible) since 2012, and secondly we're very happy to be associated with it. It is a transformational project. If you are serious about congestion, if you are serious about planning for the future - as all governments should be - then you have to take such projects seriously and so on that note I'd like to hand over to Bill. Welcome back to Brisbane Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Paul, and it's great to be back in Queensland. I think I've been in Queensland about 92 days since the last election. It's great to be here with Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, and Deputy Premier Jackie Trad and of course my finance spokesperson Jim Chalmers. All of last week I was travelling up Queensland and making clear Labor's commitments to Jobs not Cuts. And of course I was speaking at great length about our investments in the Bruce Highway for regional Queensland. But you could have knocked me over with a feather when I noticed the current Prime Minister came here in a bit of a hurried trip in the last couple of days, talking about infrastructure in south east Queensland, and no mention of Cross River Rail. Cross River Rail is a transformational project which will deal with one of the biggest challenges in Brisbane, both on the north side, but also right down to the Gold Coast - that is traffic congestion. Brisbane's an international city, it takes its place proudly amongst the ranks of great international cities. But great international cities need great public transport proposals and Cross River Rail is exactly that. This is a business case which has been worked up since 2012. Everyone who drives on the roads in south east Queensland knows that Cross River Rail is as important to Brisbane and south east Queensland as the Bruce Highway is to regional Queensland. That's why I am really pleased to recommit federal Labor to the Cross River Rail project - this visionary project - which will decrease congestion and have some great results. It is a very exciting project. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk deserves the congratulations for showing the vision for this project, but what Queenslanders deserve and what people in south east Queensland deserve is a government in Canberra who recognises that we have an obligation to reinvest some of the taxes that Queenslanders pay in south east Queensland, to reinvest that in quality public transport. This visionary exciting plan, which will see no less than four new underground stations built, see the upgrade of another two railway stations, 5.9kms of tunnel to be excavated. This will mean in a practical sense, thousands of extra passengers on the rail and indeed by 2036, tens of thousands of extra passenger places. What it means is that the drive between the Gold Coast and Brisbane, which a lot of people make, will be quicker. There will be fewer cars on the road than there otherwise would be. Everyone knows that the population in south east Queensland is going to grow. That's why we need infrastructure to lead the way not to follow behind the growth in the population. The only way you decrease traffic congestion is by providing an alternative to driving to work or driving to the city. That is why this railway project provides the next step for the next generation of investment. A Labor Government that I lead will be pleased to invest $2.24 billion dollars over the next number of years, both in the construction phase and the operations phase, and what this also means is because of our Commonwealth investment as good governments do, working with other levels of government, it means that the Queensland Government can free up very very important resources to help do a better deal even for hospitals and schools and other priorities for southeast Queensland and Queensland more generally. This is an exciting visionary project, you can't be fair dinkum about infrastructure or jobs or congestion unless you invest in  public transport and in south east Queensland the number one project is Cross River Rail. This will deliver 7,700 jobs over the construction phase and another 500 jobs in the operations phase. If you want real jobs, if you want to get around south east Queensland more quickly, if you want less congestion, and if you want Brisbane to be one of the great cities of the world, then you've got to have a vision for Cross River Rail. And on that note I'd like to hand over to Premier Palaszczuk whose vision for the whole of Queensland, from the Bruce Highway to Cross River Rail is a very exciting set of propositions for an incoming Labor Government to work with.

ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND:  Thanks Bill, and it's wonderful to have you back here in Queensland. We've been in regional Queensland last week and of course today we're here to talk about Cross River Rail. Cross River Rail is south east Queensland's number one infrastructure project. It's been my government's number one infrastructure project now since we came to office. Unfortunately, Scott Morrison and the LNP federally have failed to contribute one single dollar to Cross River Rail. In fact Scott Morrison has delivered, this much to it. Absolutely nothing. Why should Victoria and New South Wales get the lion's share of infrastructure funding when Queensland's number one infrastructure project is not given one cent by the federal government. So in Queensland, we got on with the job and we allocated over $5 billion. I welcome Bill Shorten's commitment of over $800 million for the infrastructure costs -  that's $800 million that I can use to help improve more schools and more hospitals across Queensland. This is where we work best when we work together. Why shouldn't Queensland's priorities be Canberra's priorities? Now, I really want to thank Bill for being here today. We know how many jobs this will mean to the south east of our state, over 7,700 jobs.  We've been right across Queensland over the last week talking about the upgrades to the Bruce Highway, new projects that are happening in Townsville. So I really want to thank Bill for coming here today, and with those few words I'll hand over to the Deputy Premier, just to talk a bit more about Cross River Rail, and why this is a transformational project for the south east of our state.

JACKIE TRAD, DEPUTY PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: Thank you very much Premier and many of you here would know that I have been advocating for this critical project in south east Queensland for a long time now. It's no secret that south east Queensland is one of the fastest growing areas in our nation, and we are a large contributor to the national economy, but all of this is at risk unless we can address the congestion issues confronting everyday Queenslanders on our roads and on our public transport system. And that solution is Cross River Rail. That's why, as the Premier has said, we had to go it alone without any support from Scott Morrison either when he was Treasurer and now that he is Prime Minister. That's why we had to go it alone because we could not leave Queenslanders sitting in traffic away from their families and away from their jobs. $5.4 billion has been allocated to this very important project, but with the election of a Bill Shorten Labor Government federally, what it means is that Queensland will have a partner in Canberra who will help us meet the costs of this critical project to busting congestion in south east Queensland. This is about jobs. This is about growing our economy. This is about ensuring that Queenslanders have the skills necessary for the future. And I just want to say what a stark contrast it is to have Bill here in Queensland today, recommitting billions of dollars to this project, on the one hand, then on the other hand having Scott Morrison here in the south east Queensland corner committing little bits of money here and there for park and rides, and little bits of infrastructure. What we know is we need this large scale infrastructure project to fix congestion and without Bill Shorten as the Prime Minister of Australia we know we won't get a fair deal out of Canberra. So it's great, it's refreshing to have Bill here recommitting to this critical project for Queensland. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks Jackie. Are there any questions on our commitment to Cross River Rail and new vision for public transport in south east Queensland, or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: If you are elected, that money goes towards this project I assume (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: The Premier can answer for her decisions, but the reason why the national government that I’d lead wants to invest in public transport is you can't be fair dinkum about congestion and jobs unless you're willing to revitalise our public transport infrastructure. You don't have to take my word for it, just talk to any Queenslander who sits on the busy crowded roads at peak period. We need to recognise that south east Queensland is growing. This is Queensland's number one choice for south east Queensland for infrastructure. What we need is a government in Canberra who listens to the people. Unfortunately it was former Prime Minister Tony Abbott who started leading his right wing crusade against investing in public transport in cities and it would appear that under the current fellow nothing has changed. The fact that you can come to Brisbane, be oblivious to congestion and not have an investment of public transport, just shows you people are out of touch. The other good news, of course, and I had the chance to meet some of the contractors working on the job here, is that when you spell out guaranteed funding for five years that means that the plumbers, the excavator operators, all the people who use their skills, can be guaranteed of five years plus of work. That's just good news for our construction sector and of course the Queensland Government with $800 million extra can do wonderful things in a whole range of other areas.

JOURNALIST: As you worried that the Prime Ministers  (inaudible) getting traction in the act they're giving us a number of election promises, they're spent, they're in the Budget and that might attract people to vote for it?

SHORTEN: This Government has moved its Budget forward to early April for one purpose only. Not to create a better life for Australians, but to get themselves re-elected. There is nothing this government says about infrastructure which perturbs me, except the fact that they don't know anything about public transport. We will match the local promises they make, so that's not an issue. You can vote for us and you know if there's a particular roundabout they're talking, the Government's speaking about, well that will be fine. But what this country is crying out for, not just south east Queensland, is vision. People are sick of the day to day politics. What they want to know is what do we think this country will look like in 2030 and beyond? We need, if we are to be a liveable, sustainable nation - not only investment in the Bruce Highway, not only investment in the beef roads of western Queensland - but we need to get people moving again in south-east Queensland. A good metro system is what the best cities in the world have and I only want the best for the Australian people including the people of south-east Queensland.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: Some of them are things that we've already announced and we'll study the rest of them. But isn't the point about today, where's the vision of this current Government? They've got a vision for, you know, taking each other out and, you know, are sort of continuing their civil war. If I want to have a good civil war in Australia, I'd hire the Liberal Party of Australia. If I want to get public transport built in Australia and decongest, I'd vote for the Labor Party.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] self-funded retirees support Labor when Chris Bowen says that you don't need their votes? And was that a bit arrogant on his part?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all - Chris was saying there's a choice in policies - and that's sensible, there's always a choice. But when I talk to older Australians, I put this to you: If you're sick of your energy bills going up, vote Labor because we're going to invest in renewable energy. If you're worried about your private health insurance becoming a luxury, vote Labor because we're going to restrict the increase in premiums for the next two years to 2 per cent. If you're worried about the cost of going to see the doctor, vote Labor because we're going to unfreeze the patient rebate. Wherever you look in this country, Labor's got a plan to reduce the aged care waiting lists which are a disgrace. And what we're also going to do is stop the bank rip-offs of older Australians. A lot of the victims of the banks have been older Australians, small business people, retirees, you name it. The current Prime Minister voted 26 times against having a Banking Royal Commission. So I say to not just older Australians but all Australians, if you want to make sure that we have a fair go in this country, that is not simply your postcode or your wealth which determines what happens, but getting a fair go, then we're the party for you. From health care, to the cost of living to making sure that we have good infrastructure as well.

JOURNALIST: Was it arrogant of Mr Bowen and could it cost you seats like Herbert?
SHORTEN: Well first of all, I don't accept the characterisation you're making of Mr Bowen's comments. There are choices and what we've been is upfront with the Australian people. We respect all Australians - that's why we're putting our policies out in advance. We've done something unusual in Australian politics. We're explaining how you pay for things before we then say how we're going to use some of that money. But I think it is appropriate that we shut down unsustainable tax concessions. Why are we the only country in the world who will let people claim an income tax refund when they've paid no income tax in that year? It's generous but it's not sustainable. Why do we want to be a country which will spend more on tax concessions and tax subsidies to some people who are already quite comfortable and well-off and spend more on that than we will on higher education or childcare, or a range of other important services which are fundamental to the success of this country going forward? Sorry, you're next.

JOURNALIST: On Julia Banks, do you think she stands a chance of [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: Well I wouldn't want to be in Greg Hunt shoes today. But before we start talking about Julia Banks and Greg Hunt, the Labor Party's nearly concluded its process to pick a candidate in Flinders and we'll be doing our very best to win the seat. But I will make these observations about Julia Banks: I don't know her very well but she seems to be a woman who speaks her own mind. Now, I think that her running in Flinders is the ultimate sign of failure of the Prime Minister's authority over his own party. She made it clear that she was bullied by the coup-masters who got rid of Malcolm Turnbull - who've never explained to Australians why Malcolm Turnbull is no longer there. She went to her own Prime Minister, the new fellow and said, this isn't good enough. And in the end, she was so unimpressed with his lack of authority on the issue of the proper treatment of women in the Liberal Party that she's running from outside. So I think she's very strong. I think it's a three horse race down there and I suspect in his very quiet moments, the current Minister for Health, the Member for Flinders must be regretting the fact that he was Peter Dutton's choice for deputy and that it was up to his neck in getting rid of Malcolm Turnbull. And now, the chickens have come home to roost in the form of the very formidable Julia Banks. Sorry - yourself and then yourself.

JOURNALIST: Are there any other groups like retirees who you recommend vote against Labor?

SHORTEN: Well I don't accept your characterisation. I'd refer you to the earlier answer. What I would say to Australians is this: if you are dissatisfied with the fact that everything's going up except your wages, then vote Labor. We're the only party offering a plan to improve people's wages in this country - to protect penalty rates, to make sure that women get paid the same as men. If you are unhappy, if you earn less than $120,000 a year, with the fact that you pay so much tax, you should vote for Labor because we are offering bigger tax refunds every year. Take one of the construction workers here and one of the railway workers here - say they're a married couple. Say one of them is pulling down a wage of $90,000 and the other a wage of $70,000. In our first term alone, under a Labor government, each of them is going to get nearly $3,000 back in tax refund which is almost twice as much as the Government's offering low paid and modestly paid workers. So when you look at it - if you're sick of no action on climate change, you wouldn't give this mob a third chance. If you're not happy with the fact that your energy bills keep going up, why on earth would you invest in this current mob because the reason why power prices are going up in Australia is because this government's so anti-doing anything on climate change, no one can invest in new power generation which forces prices up. And if you are unhappy that the banks didn't get a royal commission, it took so long to get the Government, or if you want multinationals to pay their fair share then you'd be voting Labor at the next election. We've got a plan for Australians and it's a very good plan and at the core of it is jobs. Everyone who gets stuck in traffic driving up from the Gold Coast should consider voting Labor because of Annastacia Palaszczuk and myself, we've got a plan to decongest the roads and to provide real public transport options to one of the fastest growing centres in Australia. Sorry you and then -

JOURNALIST: What do you have to say to charities like the Cancer Council who rely on donations from self-funded retirees who will possibly have less in their pocket?

SHORTEN: Listen, no charity is going to be affected by our changes to imputation laws - first of all. Secondly, I would say this: you're still allowed to give money in this country. And what I would also say thirdly - and this is perhaps most important - I think the charities of Australia do a fantastic job. We couldn't be where we are without them. But now, too often we're relying on our charities to fill the front-line gaps of health funding cuts under a Liberal Government. What I can say to charities in the future is that because of a Labor government, the causes you are most interested in are going to get a better deal in funding from a Labor government. We should have a health system which doesn't rely on charity but relies upon your Medicare card.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: Well first of all, it's an ecological disaster unfolding but I will remind you, as I'm sure you're aware, the Coalition, the LNP, have been in power for five years. So I think they've got a lot of explaining to do. The royal commission in South Australia will hand down its report - that's in the next hour or so. I might, having waited this long, wait an extra hour and read what they say. But you've had a question for the Premier.

JOURNALIST: Just one last one - the Prime Minister moved his press conference this morning because of Labor protesters. These were women in their 60s and 70s who were pretty quiet. What do you think about that? [Inaudible].

SHORTEN: I don't know why he moved his press conference and he's always going to blame the Labor Party for anything - probably including the weather. I've done 80 town hall meetings across Australia, many of them in regional Queensland for example. I've taken the view that you're better off inviting people and getting them in the room. I've had meetings where people have held up their placards on all sorts of issues. So I think people have got a right to express a view. They should always be polite. If Mr Morrison felt his safety was in danger or he had advice, I don't know and I don't get that's the impression what happened here at all. I think a politician will run out of places to visit in Australia if they never want to hear from people who disagree with them. One of the benefits I suppose of six years in opposition is I've had nearly every issue raised with me but I think that's how you find out what's going on. At the end of the day, the people of Australia are the bosses of the parliamentarians -not the other way round. And I think sometimes you've got to get out and about and talk to people. That's what I did on the bus, that's why I stayed on the bus for a nine day trip. You know, there's always a balance, isn't there? You know, I'm not going to second guess the current Prime Minister entirely. He'll have his motivations but if you become afraid of talking to the people well then the people will work that out pretty quickly. Thanks everybody. 

MIKE KELLY, MEMBER FOR EDEN-MONARO: Good morning everyone, it's great to have you here today in one of the most beautiful, iconic locations in Australia, at this far South Coast magic of Tathra. This is a community of course, which last year suffered a terrible situation with an out of season wild bushfire that destroyed 65 homes, which I think drew a line under the situation we face with the increasing extremes of weather due to climate change. And this community here was at the forefront of leading the fight on climate change, it was the birth place of Clean Energy for Eternity. So they understand only too well the importance of action on climate change, and are only too eager to see the transition to renewable energy, and they've managed to do that across many community establishments around this region. I've been pleased to have worked with them on raising funds for things like getting these solar panels on the Tathra Sea Eagles Club. And it's great to see here today community action groups that are so community minded, like that Tathra Sea Eagles, who are doing so much great work supporting the community, particularly during those fires and getting those solar panels up. Clean Energy for Eternity here today with us as well who have representatives from the University of the Third Age to. All combining together as a community to move the ball forward, to show leadership where leadership has been absent at the federal level. In the army we used to have a saying, "lead, follow or get out of the way." I think the message this community is sending to the Federal Government now is look, you've failed to lead, you've failed to follow, just get out of the way. And fortunately we have here today a true leader, who gets the climate change issue, who gets the need to transition to renewable energy for the jobs and the economy of the future that we need, and it was here during the worst of those traumas of the fire, talking to people and feeling their pain, and it's great to have Bill follow through on that involvement, interest and commitment. We haven't see that from the Coalition, so I really thank you Bill for showing that compassion and heart to be here for this community and really delighted to have you here today for this announcement. So thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Mike. Good morning everybody, this is fantastic to be in Tathra. Of course the last time I was here this community was reeling from shocking bushfires and it's not easy to recover, but this is a very resilient community. But I'm also pleased to be in Tathra, to announce that Tathra will be the start of a $100 million community power hub system in Australia. What we're going to do is allocate $10 million, to provide the Tathra and surrounding communities with the opportunity to embrace the clean energy revolution, which is taking place throughout the world and Australia. We are backing more renewable energy for Tathra and the surrounding area, on the basis that it's going to deliver cheaper power, it will deliver more jobs and it will take real action on climate change. Behind me you see roof of the Sea Eagles Football Club in the local district. What they've done there is they have invested in solar panels and batteries, to get lower energy costs so the footy club can spend more of its budget on football as opposed to energy bills. But too often we find in local communities, that if you're a renter, or if you're a community group you can't always access the benefits of solar power or wind power. So the principle behind our hub, our community power hub, is to provide some modest resources to allow go ahead communities to actually move ahead and be able to invest in clean energy. This is the future. Australia should be an energy superpower, we should we a climate change superpower and we should be doing a lot more than we are. What Labor is doing, is we're focusing on policy, which will allow members of the community, people who don't necessary have a great deal of wealth or community groups who don't have vast balance sheets, to benefit from clean energy - renewable energy. It's a very exciting announcement. We're going to roll out 10 of these community hubs around Australia. But congratulations to Mike Kelly and the Tathra community in the Bega area, they have shown leadership. And really, what we see here today in Tathra, is a description of what's happening in Australia. The people of Australia are ahead of the Government of Australia, the Government has got to play catch up. But under a Labor government, we will be partners with the community to have cheaper power, more jobs and real action on climate change. Thanks, everybody. It's great that you're all here today, appreciate it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, how many jobs will the hub create?

SHORTEN: Well it depends on the projects that get created but there will have to be jobs for installers, there will have to be jobs for the manufacturers who need to meet with the increased demand. There's no doubt in my mind that if we invest in renewable energy,  there are thousands of jobs which will become available in the Australian economy. Renewable energy is something which Australia should be better at. Germany has far less sunlight than us yet they employ more people in renewable energy. We should be much better at producing energy more cheaply and more cleanly than we currently are. Hong Kong, it is an island with no natural resources, produces cheaper energy than Australia does. How did it get to be that Australia, who has so much in the way of energy resources, is so expensive? And there's one simple explanation - the current government is just stuck in the past. I think most Australians are sick and tired of the climate change wars, they're sick and tired of Mr Abbott and the conservatives who are running energy policy in this country. It's no surprise to me that you've got independent Liberals running against their own party because this nation cannot be stalled on climate change policy any longer. Now I'm out here announcing sensible policies which reflect what the community has said to us. The Government, they're just waiting for an announcement from another unhappy Liberal largely based around climate change policies to run against them. This nation can't afford to waste any more time. The lack of policy certainty is killing us in renewable energy. How do you get investment in new energy if you don't set up the rules to invest in new energy? And what we're seeing is less reliable power under this government and we're seeing higher prices.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten in practical terms, what does a hub look like? It sounds like something someone plugs into but what does a hub look like for the renters and the low income earners that you point to?

SHORTEN: It's a description of a series of projects which communities can determine, which will generate cheaper power and renewable energy. For example; it could help with the installation for community groups of small-scale solar farms, it could be used to help facilitate the implementation of more panels on roofs in community groups. So it's a range of measures which local communities can use. Its seed-funding which will generate common sense small-scale projects which will allow community groups or perhaps renters, people living in social housing who don't have the wherewithal to individually invest in renewable energy to get to that critical mass so they too can access cheaper energy which is renewable.

JOURNALIST: How well set-up is the Lodge to address climate change? You'll be living in it later this year if today's opinion polls are correct. Are there solar panels on the roof of the Lodge?

SHORTEN: I have no idea. I have to say in terms of the polls, and I just make this observation despite your compliment in it. I made a decision nearly six years ago not to analyse the polls - good, bad or indifferent. It's the policy I had when Tony Abbott was Prime Minister, it's the policy I had when Malcolm Turnbull was Prime Minister and nothing the current fellow's done is going to distract me from developing good policy. If you look after the policy, the politics looks after itself.

JOURNALIST: Does Australia risk falling into recession under a Labor government?

SHORTEN: Listen, the government's just talking more and more fear every day. I say to Australians, get used to the fact that an increasingly desperate government with barely months left in their term of office, are going to start trying to scare people more and more. But the reality is that there are big issues in this country not being addressed. We have no meaningful climate change policy under the government that currently leads Australia - that's a risk. Families, they're getting their kids ready to go back to school from tomorrow all around Australia, cost of living pressures are a real risk to Australian householders. What's happening wherever you go in Australia, be it in the coast, in the bush, in the cities - everything is going up except your wages. The real risk in Australia at the moment is that the current government is managing the economy in the interests of the top end of town, and yet, everyday households are having to dip into family savings to make ends meet. So the real risk in Australia at the moment is another term of Coalition government. The single biggest risk, not even the inaction on climate change which is shocking, not only the cuts to hospitals and schools which is terrible, not only the fact that we've got a government who never seems to worry about cost of living pressures going up, the fact that everything is going up except wages, the single biggest risk is instability. Does anyone seriously think that the Coalition doesn't view this current election as a distraction from getting on with the civil war in the Liberal Party and the National Party? Instability is driving Australians around the - you know, to the points of distraction. The most common sentiment I got this summer, when I was on the beach and elsewhere is people just said when will we have some stable government in this country? That is what I can promise Australians - stability with a sensible plan.

JOURNALIST: Does the government deserve credit for creating 1.2 million jobs?

SHORTEN: I think it's a description of the economy. I mean, I think when we look at the creation of jobs Australians deserve credit, Australian business deserves credit, government deserves some credit. A lot of the jobs that have been created have been in the NDIS for example. What we've got to realise in Australia is it's not that - we've got to get over the politics of just the blame game and get back to outlining proper vision and policy. This country needs to work together a lot more than it currently does. We have got to for instance solve the energy crisis by investing in renewable energy. We have got to restore people's penalty rates so we can get wages moving again in this country. We have got to improve the patient rebate for Medicare so that people can get relief from cost of living pressures in health care. This country works best when middle and working class Australians are doing okay. At the moment they're getting squeezed, corporate profits are up six times wages, the problem is this economy is not working in the interests of every day Australians and their families. All good?

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says the Boyne Aluminium Smelter will be forced to close under a Labor government, what do you make of that?

SHORTEN: Oh listen, this government has only got the Tony Abbott playbook from 2013. Remember the government - the Liberals said that Whyalla would shut, it's expanding. Let's just call out the fear campaign of the government for what it is. They've run out of anything to say about themselves, all they can do is talk about us. I think a lot of Australians are aghast when they realise that the current government has only commissioned ten days of parliament in eight months. The Senate under this government is only going to sit for seven days. Imagine how many Australians returning to work this week after their month on holiday were to just say to their boss, listen I've been thinking about it, I've decided I only want to come to work for ten days in eight months - good luck, they'll say you can stay away for the whole eight months buddy. The fact of the matter is this is a government who has no legislative agenda. You know, take for instance the issue of the Murray Darling Basin, big issue. We're seeing fish kills in large and alarming numbers it's an ecological disaster. Water, availability, it's quality, it's one of the key issues in Australia. You don't hear the government talking about that they just worry about is another member of the team going to quit today, is another unhappy Liberal going to announce they are running as an independent? This government has nothing to say positively about the future of Australia. They can tell you everything about us, they can tell you everything about their own civil war, but they can't talk about the people of Australia. That's what is happening.

JOURNALIST: On the seat of Gilmore, what do you make of news that Katrina Hodgkinson might run for the Nationals?

SHORTEN: Another conservative running in Gilmore isn't going to change what happens in Gilmore. The real issues in Gilmore is the fact that everything is going up except peoples wages. The real issues in Gilmore is that they haven't had sufficient investment in local infrastructure. The real issues in Gilmore are that we've seen hospital cuts, we've seen private health insurance become - with their price increases, practically become a luxury item. The real issues in Gilmore are the people who are very low paid lost their penalty rates arbitrarily. There are many issues in Gilmore, from NBN access and blackspots through to how are we going to fund our schools and preschools. Whoever is running for the Coalition is not my issue. The issue for me is the cost of living and the daily lives of people in Gilmore. It does highlight of course, the instability within the government, you've got Nationals running against Liberals, you've got ex-Liberals running against Liberals in safe seats. This government is a mess and every day we just see more chaos, more confusion, more instability. Any other questions? Thanks, everybody and I just want to thank the community here for the successful lobbying for the community, this is your renewable energy community power hub, well done. Thank you very much.

TIM WATTS, MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND: Good morning. My name's Tim Watts, I am the Federal Member for Gellibrand. I'm delighted to be here this morning on the banks of the Maribyrnong River, the jewel of Melbourne's west to welcome Bill Shorten, the Leader of the Opposition and Tony Burke the Shadow Minister for Environment and Water for this really exciting announcement. We love our waterways in Melbourne's west, from the Maribyrnong River you see here behind us, to the creeks that flow through our creeks and reserves, to the internationally renowned wetlands of Hobsons Bay and Wyndham City. This is where Melbourne's west lives and plays. We live and play in our waterways. Walking, running, cycling, fishing just enjoying what nature has to offer. But unfortunately, all too often this beautiful natural gift to our environment has come into conflict with the industrial and urban heritage of Melbourne's west. For far too long our city urban creeks have been used as drains for our industrial sites and more recently their close proximity to our major industrial areas, has resulted in major industrial accidents causing enormous environmental damage to our waterways. As we saw recently with the West Footscray factory fire and the incredible damage that that did to Stoney Creek. That's why I'm really thrilled that a future Labor Shorten government will give our urban waterways the priority that they deserve. I'm particularly thrilled that this policy will put our community groups at the heart and centre of the preservation and rehabilitation of our urban waterways. I've seen firsthand how these community groups, they are the reason that we have these fantastic community assets, these urban waterways for us all to enjoy and I'm really excited to see what an announcement like today's is going to do for their efforts in the future. So on that note I'll hand over to Bill Shorten the Leader of the Opposition to talk us through this announcement. Thanks for being here Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. Fantastic to be here as the Member for Maribyrnong welcoming you to the Maribyrnong, here with Tony Burke our Shadow spokesperson, he will speak after me about our city rivers rescue package, $200 million to rescue our urban rivers and give them the sort of respect which they deserve. Also we are here with Tim Watts the local Member for Gellibrand and Katie Hall our state Member for Footscray, who got the biggest swing in the last state election to Labor. Today I'm pleased to announce that a Labor government if elected will invest $200 million to rescue our city rivers. We should always remember that our rivers have traditionally been the shopping centres for birds and for fish. They were never meant to be dumping grounds for shopping trolleys and plastic bags. So Labor is going to invest in our rivers, we are going to work with community groups to improve the sustainability of our rivers. The rivers of our cities are some of the neglected arteries of city life right across Australia. We think that a modest investment of taxpayer money will reap great dividends to ensuring that our kids and our grandkids will be able to enjoy the rivers as the way they were always intended to be. But our rivers are stressed not just of course, at Menindee and the big Murray Basin, Murrumbidgee Basin river system, but even our city rivers have been neglected under this Government. So Labor is going to unfurl a program of grants across the next five years which will see our rivers receive the sort of investment which volunteer groups and municipalities have been crying out for. What I might now do is to talk further about our city river rescue package of $200 million to revitalise the great rivers of our cities, I might invite Tony Burke to talk more about the detail of this exciting announcement.

TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER: Thanks Bill. Today will change what it's like to live in our cities. For so many people the rivers are their favourite backyard, but that backyard has been treated like a stormwater drain for far too long. Today's announcement provides the opportunity for the community groups that have already been doing so much of the work cleaning up the plastics, getting the shopping trolleys out, to be able to increase the outcomes that they deliver but also for us to work with state government, with local government to be able to clean up the waterways in a more direct way. Some of that will be wetlands, some of that will be naturalisation of river banks, some of it will be will be bird boxes. A whole lot of it is in making sure that a river has the full ecology of a river. And one of the things that we've found is like the wetlands that have been put back further up the Maribyrnong from where we are now, it's a classic case of build it and they will come and you end up with that bird life, that fish life right through to the butterflies actually becoming part of the local community again and people who live in urban areas have a right to this. For a long time Labor's had a history with rivers whether it was Franklin, whether it's been the Murray-Darling Basin, but today we say nature shouldn't be too far away from people who live in our cities as well and urban rivers get put back into the centre of environmental policy as well.

SHORTEN: Thanks Tony. Are there any questions on our urban rivers announcement?

JOURNALIST: Would you like to see, I guess people you know, happily swimming here in the Maribyrnong at some point, is that part of it or is it more about the nature side of it, what are you trying to achieve?

SHORTEN: Well it's probably not a well known fact but the Maribyrnong is one of my favourite running tracks. There's lots of cyclists, I was running along the banks here this morning. But when you run along the river and you see so many people using our rivers and it's not just this river, it's rivers right through our urban centres around Australia - you realise that we've been neglecting the welfare of our rivers. You know, from the shopping trollies to the rubbish to the plastic bags, to treating them as open drains. I would like to see our rivers cleaned up. Then down the track how people use it, well that's up to them, but our first step is more wetlands, more revegetation, taking a stand against the erosion which is occurring on our rivers, making sure we clean them up. The rivers of Australia are not the stormwater drains of Australia. Nature shouldn't be too far from someone’s backyard and when you look at our crowded cities, the more we can put bike paths along some of our rivers, the more that people can get recreation from along our rivers and the more that we can clean them up, I just think that's fantastic for the whole of our city life right across Australia no matter where you live.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned Menindee there's been another big fish kill there. What needs to be done in response to that?
SHORTEN: I'll get Tony to supplement this but I think it's fair to say that we are facing the makings of an ecological disaster in Australia's greatest river system, the Murray Darling. Again, more fish kills - this is not standard, this is not normal. Now Labor wrote to the Government early this month and said "come on let's work together here. Let's get our skates on. The Australian people have noticed this, this is not acceptable.” They sort of tried to brush us off and not do what they were meant to do. So I commissioned the Australian Academy of Science to provide an expert report, which they will provide to the Opposition before Parliament resumes. We will provide the entire report along with the experts to the Parliament for their consideration. This is a disaster and the disaster keeps unfolding and part of the problem here is that, can you get the Government to focus on the fish kills? No they're too busy fighting each other. Tony might have a bit more to say because he went up to Menindee recently.

BURKE: Yes, thanks. The last river I was at, before today at the Maribyrnong, the last river I was at was the Darling where you can just see the ecological disaster that's occurring there. The first reports that have come out about the fish kill today say, and these reports may change, that this one has been caused for different reasons to the last one. So we're going to need to get the scientific information on this. One of the things that nature has a pretty strong view with, is if you keep negotiating too hard against nature eventually nature comes back to the negotiating table and is the toughest negotiator of all. I think that's what we're watching right now in the Murray-Darling. We need the scientists to tell us exactly what's happened, exactly what the reasons are, exactly what can be done to prevent it, and then we need in good faith to be able to turn that into policy. I will say for all the disaster we're seeing at the moment, thank heavens we had a Murray-Darling Basin Plan because everything we are seeing would be worse without it. That said, what we're seeing is unacceptable and we need to get to the bottom of the causes. The scientists need to lead that, not political debate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on another matter if I may, will Labor be preferencing Zali Steggal in Warringah and will you effectively run dead in the seat like you did in Wentworth?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, I think it's significant that Zali Steggall has decided to nominate in Warringah. She's a  very strong and capable person, clearly Labor doesn't agree with every point of view she holds, but I congratulate her for standing up and I think that'll be a pretty exciting contest to watch. But Tony Abbott is a formidable and tough campaigner - I wouldn't write him off either. But what I think is important here is that every day, day after day, we see fresh chaos and continuing disunity in the Government. If it's not members of the government walking out the door, it's other Liberal supporters running against the Government as independents. This is a government that's lurching from crisis to crisis, and in the meantime the big issues are just not getting addressed. So on climate change, which is I think the primary reason why Ms Steggall is running, we agree that Tony Abbott's been a blocking action on climate change - but it's not just him it's the whole Government. This government needs to start focusing on the people and not on itself.

JOURNALIST: Do you expect Steggall to attract funding from areas outside of the electorate?

SHORTEN: I don't know how she's constituting her funding but the Liberal Party is still in government, they're the party of vested interests. Big business come out every day and bash Labor in order to get votes for the government.  I don't think the Liberal Party is about to run out of money any time soon. But again this is a government - every day it's a new story of disunity or continuing chaos. If it's not government members giving up and walking out the door, it's longtime Liberals deciding to run against the Government as independents. So I think the Government is consumed by themselves and they can't focus on the people. Today we are here announcing an urban rivers policy. What's the chance this government's going to ever announce an urban rivers policy? They're too busy fighting amongst themselves. Today in Menindee, reports of big fish kills again following on what we've seen elsewhere - what's the chance this going to do anything on climate change? Later this week parents are sending their kids back to school. Today and tomorrow parents will be battling the back to school costs: cost of living pressures, energy bills, health insurance. What is the chance that this government is going to do anything about that when you're so focused on themselves?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the unions (inaudible) has refused to sign up to insurance for superannuation code of practice, should First Super take APRA's advice and merge with a larger fund and sign up to that code of practice and why should this fund be allowed to defy APRA's urgings?

SHORTEN: Well I'm not a trustee of the super fund, the trustees are accountable to their members. I did notice The Australian newspaper said that First Super's performance had been top quarter for quite a period of time. If a fund, it doesn't matter whose the trustees, is delivering for its members, that's what matters. But I'm not going to second guess APRA here and I'm not going to second guess the superannuation trustees.

JOURNALIST: Just on international policy, Venezuela, the Australian Government has announced this morning, it has recognised the Opposition there, do you support that move?

SHORTEN: Yes we do. We support what the Government's done, just as, I should say it's not just our government but it's France, it's Germany, it's the United States, the United Kingdom, we hope the Venezuelan people reach stability soon. Just going back to the answer on superannuation, of course Friday is when the banking royal commission comes out. I just reiterate my Shadow Treasurer's call, Mr Morrison release the banking royal commission findings straight away. Don't play any political games. I know that you voted against the banking royal commission 26 times - he voted against Labor's banking royal commission, the Government and the current Prime Minister voted 26 times against the banking royal commission. Don't try and game it at the end of the day with a royal commission report you didn't want and you oppose bitterly. Release it straightaway on Friday - no time for games. Too many thousands of people have been victims of bad banking practice. I'm demanding that the Government release the report on Friday. You didn't want the royal commission. Don't pretend now that you're going to save your reputation by hatching it for a few days or weeks.

JOURNALIST: Another international politics question if that's okay. Given China's actions of detaining an Australian citizen for no reason, is there a case for Australia to make a choice between the major powers in favour of the United States and should we start being tougher on China?

SHORTEN: Well first of all I'm not going to do megaphone diplomacy. An Australian citizen has been detained in China - I and My Shadow Foreign Minister Penny Wong immediately said that the Chinese Government was too slow in informing the Australian Government that an Australian citizen had been detained. We want to get to the bottom of why this person has been detained and we want all consular assistance to be provided. We support the work that the Government's doing there. Whether or not Australia should then rip up all our relations with China, that would be a very premature call. International relations need to be marked by cautious and considered steps. We've always got to fight for Australian interests and Australians but I'm not going to extrapolate this one action which is surprising and concerning and therefore say that we have to join in what everything President Trump says.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, there are reports Julia Banks, former Liberal, is considering to challenge Greg Hunt. What does that say to you?
SHORTEN: Julia Banks is a very strong woman. You know, she has never voted for the Labor Party but she stood up against the bullying and the removal of Malcolm Turnbull. A lot of Australians are asking why is Malcolm Turnbull not there? They've never got a proper answer. It appears that the Member for Flinders, the current Minister of Health, Greg Hunt was in it up to his neck to get rid of Mr Turnbull. So clearly, if Ms Banks runs, I'm sure the first question she'll say to Greg Hunt on the campaign trail in Flinders is 'why is Malcolm Turnbull no longer Prime Minister?'
JOURNALIST: And will you repeal the MyHealth records legislation and policy if you come to power?

SHORTEN: I really wish that Greg Hunt, the Minister for Health, spent as much time on the MyHealth records and getting it right as he did in rolling Malcolm Turnbull. There's a lot of concern. We like the idea and support the idea of digitisation of health records to make it easier for treating health professionals to be able provide better quality care. The principle is sound but the lack of safeguards around the privacy has been most concerning. Over 1.1 million Australians I understand have already opted out of the MyHealth records scheme because of concerns about privacy. I think the Government, rather than rush the scheme, should get it right and it should extend the period for people to opt out to see if it can't address the concerns of Australians. The Government shouldn't attack the people opting out of MyHealth record system - they should just protect the privacy of people in it.

JOURNALIST: Have you opted-out?

SHORTEN: No.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of the Indigenous Voice to Parliament, is Labor committed to holding a referendum within their first term of government or is it possible that it would happen later? And if you are committed to doing it in your first term, how are you going to garner support for it?
SHORTEN: My answer hasn't changed since a colleague in your newspaper asked me that twice last week. We do accept there should be a voice to parliament I think the idea that our first Australians should be on the nation's birth certificate, the Constitution, makes sense. If we were writing the constitution today- as opposed to back in the 1890s - there's no way we would have neglected to mention our First Australians. We will work it through, we will talk to people, we will consult. I believe Australians do think that our first Australians should be included in our constitution.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the royal commission - you might have covered this before so apologies - but will you commit to implementing all the recommendations of the royal commission once it's released?

SHORTEN: In principle, we've said that we would. What we need to do is see the actual report. Now this Banking Royal Commission, Labor's pleased that from Opposition, we managed to force this recalcitrant government into having a Banking Royal Commission. I remember when the former Prime Minister Turnbull told off the banks at the 199th anniversary of Westpac - he was their guest. It was the next day, Labor said 'well look, the Government think that there's problems. Labor's got a solution - a Banking Royal Commission. Sadly, it would appear that Mr Morrison, the current Prime Minister  - not only did he vote 26 times not to have a Banking Royal Commission, 26 times he voted against Labor's Banking Royal Commission. But it turns out that from leaks from within the Cabinet, he was the chief architect of the defend the banks at all cost. So we think the Government should just release the report on Friday - full stop.

JOURNALIST: On Zali Steggall again - given she wants more action on climate change but she is also financially conservative, how would that fit with Labor in terms of any potential preference decision?

SHORTEN: This is an independent, she's just announced that she's running yesterday. We'll examine her policies. One thing's for sure, Labor's committed to supporting action on climate change. Only Labor can form a government, the independents can't. We're committed to real action on climate change. We're committed to 50 per cent renewable energy as part of our energy mix by 2030. We want to roll out more solar batteries into households so that households can be part of the climate change revolution and they can get lower prices. As people return to send their kids back to school this week and next week right across Australia, cost of living is the number one issue. Everything's been going up in Australia except their wages. Energy bills are out of control and one of the reasons why energy bills are out of control is because we haven't had investment in new generation, new sources of energy. And the reason why we haven't had investment in new sources of energy? Because this government's stubbornly lives in the past and doesn't want to do anything about climate change. So I think that independents - even people who voted Liberal their whole lives - are saying no more, we can't just be a nation who turns its back on the future, who rejects the science in favour of just political slogans, we want to make action on climate change real.
JOURNALIST: On citizenship tests, how many times should people be able to fail it before they're barred from sitting it again?
SHORTEN: Well listen, I saw that some have people failed and most people passed.  You're allowed to re-sit your citizenship tests - you're allowed to re-sit your driver's license. I'm not going to say that if you fail a citizenship test once on a question you didn't know, that you're barred from becoming a citizen of Australia. I do wonder if some of our government MPs, if they're asked a question 'who circumnavigated Australia' I'm not even sure our Prime Minister would pass that question, but you can get things muddled. I think we should be giving people a second chance on a citizenship test. Great, lovely. Welcome to Maribyrnong.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. I just want to take this opportunity at a citizenship ceremony in Footscray, in my local electorate, to wish everybody in Australia - happy Australia Day. Australia Day is a fantastic day. It's a chance for people to reflect on the fact that we live in one of the best countries in the world. We're truly the lucky country. It's also an opportunity to have a reflection and catch up with family and friends and enjoy a long weekend. I also want to put on record my gratitude to all the people who are working today and across the long weekend - and if you're getting penalty rates, you have certainly have earned them and deserve them. And finally I think it's appropriate as we celebrate our national day, to give pause and realise how lucky we are to share this continent with people who have a continuous connection to country for over 60,000 years - we really are a very special country. Happy to take any questions that people might have.

JOURNALIST: I have quite a few.

SHORTEN: Okay. Let's go through them.

JOURNALIST: Just on Michael Keenan to start with, what do you make of that announcement? He was demoted after the leadership spill, do you think it was retaliation?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, just on the string of government MPs who've announced their decisions on the eve of the election to retire, I wish them well personally. Service in the parliament is a privilege. The people, I believe, across the political spectrum give it their absolute best. So I wish them well personally and their families. Meanwhile generally, this just shows though a government that's barely limping to the end of its term. Three ministers in a week have said they're not recontesting. It's another three members of this government not even recontesting the next election. This is a government where its members have given up and now they're walking out the door. But what I want to say to Australians is that whilst this government lurches ever increasingly into a cycle of chaos - that it goes day to day with even greater chaos - the Labor Party is working in a united way. We're united, we're stable. We're concentrating on policy to present a plan to the Australian people for their consideration at the next election. Whilst the government's focused on its retirement we're focused on the future of Australian families.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has refused to guarantee that no other frontbenchers will quit before the election. He's also said that you also wouldn't be able to make that guarantee - can you?

SHORTEN:  I can't guarantee that government ministers won't retire. I suspect if the rumour mill is right, there's plenty more to come. The government has had nine of its current ministers and backbenchers just say that's it. They're either not recontesting or that their party has dumped them. This is a government in chaos. I don't think it's right for the government to compare his level of disunity with our level of unity. My frontbench is excited by the future - they want to put forward a positive plan to promote the interests of working middle class Australians. Federal Labor is now the party of stability in Australian politics. We're united and we're focused on the future of Australians, we're not talking about ourselves.

JOURNALIST: I think there's been - does this increase the chances of an early election?

SHORTEN:  I just think this government simply running out of puff. They're too focused on fighting themselves. More and more of their members have decided that they don't want to continue serving in the Parliament. It's a government which has lost its way, its members are now giving up and walking out the door. And what I want to say to Australians though is that the Labor Party is the complete opposite. We're focused on a plan for Australian families to tackle the cost of living. In a day and age where everything's going up except wages, we're offering fair dinkum tax refunds for ten million Australians - a thousand dollars a year, near enough, each person who earns between $41,000 and $90,000 a year. We're focused on renewable energy to get energy prices down. We're certainly focused on reversing the cuts to schools and hospitals. Labor's got a plan which puts everyday Australians at the front of the queue. That's our motivation. We want better hospital not bigger multinationals. We want better schools not better tax loopholes for those people who are already well-off. So we're focused on the future. The government - the reason why Mr Morrison can't guarantee more retirements, is because he knows there is more coming.

JOURNALIST: So can you guarantee that none of your frontbenchers will quit?

SHORTEN: I'm not aware of any of my frontbenchers intending to retire at this stage, no. I don't think Mr Morrison can say that.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that there'll be more ministers to resign in the months to come?

SHORTEN: Well it's - the government decided, bizarrely, towards the end of last year that they would only have ten days of Parliament in basically the first eight months of this year - ten days of work. In the Senate the government decided that the government senators should only turn up to formal Senate sittings for seven days. As we sit back and reflect on Australia Day this weekend I wonder how many other Australians unlike the current government, the current Prime Minister, could go until their boss that they're going to turn up to work for ten days in eight months. This is a government who's run out of ideas, they seem to be running out of government members, and I think sooner or later they're going to run out of time.

JOURNALIST: How much of a blow do you think this is to the Coalition -

SHORTEN: Sorry, I missed that?

JOURNALIST: How much of a blow do you think that this last week has been to Coalition?

SHORTEN: I'm not here to commentate on the Coalition's internal chaos. What I'm here is to reassure Australians, we are united in Labor - we've learned our lessons. This summer when I was on the beach I'd get people who said listen, they’ve been voting for the Liberals since Robert Menzies, they've never thought about voting Labor nationally until this election, and I do so not because they agree with everything we say - they like some of our ideas and they don't like other of our ideas. But what Australians across the political spectrum are saying is we just want one Prime Minister for three years. We want a government that focuses on us, that fights for us, not each other. That's what Labor's hearing loud and clear right across Australia.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe some of the reasons that have been given about wanting to spend more time with family or do you think that it's actually that these members are just abandoning the sinking ship?

SHORTEN:  I'm not going to second guess the stated reasons for individual members - people have got a right to retire. It's not compulsory to run for Parliament, or be in Parliament, that's their choice, and you know I'm not going to second guess that. All good? Thanks everybody.

ELIDA FAITH, LABOR’S CANDIDATE FOR LEICHHARDT: Good afternoon my name is Elida Faith, I am the Labor candidate for Leichhardt and I am here this afternoon with Opposition Leader Bill Shorten who shortly is going to be making an exciting announcement on jobs for our region. I am also here today with Shadow Minister for Regions Stephen Jones and Shadow Minister for Human Services Ed Husic. 40 per cent of the Australian workforce is in insecure work. People are doing it tough. They are struggling to put food on the table because it is really hard to find secure full time employment especially here in our region. We are seeing an increase in casualisation. An increase in unfair labour hire services. An increase in outsourcing of essential government services and it is just not good enough. That is why today’s announcement is really exciting for us here and it is on the back of our recent announcement for $60 million that is going to see the Cairns University Hospital become a reality. And $15 million to upgrade our very busy Cairns Hospital emergency department. And I would like now to hand you over to Bill. Thank you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi everyone it is great to be in Cairns finishing my nine day tour of Queensland. I really wanted to be here today and so when the diary commitments for tomorrow’s Australia Day in Melbourne loomed I was not going to let distance stop me. So I wanted to be here with Elida Faith, she is an outstanding candidate.  And I also want to be in Cairns as I have good news for Cairns. A Labor Government if elected will deliver 100 permanent jobs for the Department of Human Services in Cairns. It is so important that we make sure that we decentralise jobs in Australia. And it is so important that we make sure that the Department of Human Services and government services are responsive to the needs of local communities.  I had the opportunity to talk to a couple of fantastic people, Katrina and Alan, they told me their stories. They are people that need the requirement of some government support through no fault of their own. But unfortunately due to the terrible cuts to Centrelink, cuts to the Department of Human Services over the last five years, we are hearing and I have heard personally shocking and unacceptable treatment of our fellow Australians because of the cutbacks in services. I make no negative judgment about the existing staff at DH&S. They are true trojans, they are doing a magnificent job. They are being asked to do more with less. The problem is we have a government that does not value looking after Australians that periodically need assistance.  What we see is the casualisation of our government services. We see the use of contractors. We see the use of unfair contract arrangements undermining and cutting back the social safety net. In life you never know when you are going to need a hand. That is why people pay their taxes.  It is important that people in Far North Queensland and in Cairns who pay their taxes to Canberra receive some of the services in their own region. Labor understands that Queensland is much more than South East Queensland. We believe fundamentally in the great future for Far North Queensland. From tourism, through to defence services, through to better infrastructure, better hospitals and better schools and of course jobs, jobs, jobs and secure jobs. Today’s exciting announcement about 100 jobs in Cairns, follows extensive lobbying by Elida Faith, she is already getting the runs on the board and she is not even the member for Leichhardt. Not making long winded, gasbagging speeches where nothing ever happens, she is action woman. She is getting on and doing things. But I must also acknowledge the people who did the Cairns convoy to Canberra, you know Advance Cairns. They are a good group of business people. At the end of the day when I met with them they were not interested in Labor or Liberal or LNP or Labor, they just wanted action for their community. And I listened and we’re listening and Labor listens. And if we can get the marvellous outcome of Elida Faith to be local member it is going to be a shot in the arm, it’s a bit of rejuvenation. Sometimes you can be in one job for too long. You get tired and you get past it. That is not Elida, she is a dynamo and she is going to stand up for working people. This announcement today, to conclude, also finishes a raft of exciting announcements of Labor’s vision for Far North Queensland.  And health is at the centre of our vision for Far North Queensland. When you have your health anything else is possible.  But if that is under pressure then everything becomes under pressure.  That is why Labor was happy to lead the way with our commitment to the Cairns University Hospital with $10 million to acquire land and $50 million to contribute towards the construction.  But our support for health does not just stop at our vision for the future. Our vision which sees Cairns as an international destination - so that we can train and attract Cairns the best and the brightest and to help train people and that helps to generate a stronger local economy. But we are determined to upgrade the emergency department here. At the Cairns Base Hospital, Cairns Hospital, our emergency trauma people and the people that work there do a fantastic job. But it is long overdue to get an upgrade to the facilities so we can make sure that we are providing assistance to people that need urgent assistance in the most professional first class facilities, and that also helps take the  burden off our doctors and nurses and paramedics. Of course too only a Labor government at the next election can be trusted to reverse the cuts to Cairns Hospital. It is about $7.3 million over the last three years.  If you haven’t got your health then everything else becomes under pressure. And only Labor can be trusted to properly fund health care in Far North Queensland and when you look at that plus our other exciting initiatives extending the Bruce to the airport, and I want to do more to tackle congestion, combine that with our vision for jobs, Labor is the party for Far North Queensland and Elida Faith deserves people’s votes at the next election. We're happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Warren Mundine is a good get for the Liberals?

SHORTEN: No. Listen I understand there's resentment within the Labor Party towards Mr Mundine but that's not really my focus. What I find so telling about the current Prime Minister's captain's call is I think it is extraordinary that he would fight so hard to impose his mate against his party's wishes. I would have thought that he would have been wiser to ensure, especially in a seat like Gilmore where there's allegations of bullying against the former women member of parliament that surely this is a seat that he should have fought to impose a woman to replace a woman. I can think of no Liberal seat anywhere else in Australia where this should have been even more the case. But instead, when people ask Mr Morrison, when they question him what he's doing to help women into parliament he says our party don't intervene to help women. When it comes to his mates and blokes all of a sudden he's up for the fight and I think this just shows the ongoing chaos and confusion in the government at the moment and my prediction is we're going to see more government members jump ship. They know that their party has lost the will to govern. I mean how else could you explain the fact that in the first eight months of this year - or from when parliament last sat, this lazy, work shy LNP government in Canberra have only scheduled seven days for senators to show up for work and ten for the House of Representatives. Imagine anyone else in Cairns or Far North Queensland ringing the boss and saying, listen I've had a long hard think over summer and I'd like to turn up for ten days in the first seven or eight months of this year. You'd get the sack.

JOURNALIST: Are you really worried he might win Gilmore?

SHORTEN: Listen that will be up to the voters to decide. What I know is that Fiona Phillips, she'll stand against cuts to hospitals, she'll make sure that there's proper infrastructure, at Shoalhaven for example. She wants to see every school in Gilmore properly funded and she certainly won't support tax cuts for the big end of town. She wants to see better tax refunds for every Australian, nearly ten million who earn less than $120,000 a year. She believes that you've got to have more renewable energy in the system because that will help tackle climate change and reduce energy prices. She's committed to properly funding our health care system and reversing the freeze on the patient rebate which people get when they visit the doctor. But I do think that this Liberal civil war in Gilmore is just another latest example of a Liberal government who's lost the will to govern. They're either jumping ship or pushing each other off and I think that the sooner we can have the election and just get on with some stability in Australia, get on with some certainty, then I think the better.
JOURNALIST: What's your message to China after detaining an Australian citizen?

SHORTEN: Well it's a, it is a very disturbing, very disturbing development. There are protocols between China and Australia and between countries when a country detains a citizen of another country, we need to get to the bottom of it. I am not going to engage in megaphone diplomacy, I mean individuals in the parliament can have their own views and I respect that but for the current Prime Minister and myself, we're either the government or the alternative government. We need to work through this intelligently and robustly and I certainly hope that Minister Pyne has some success in resolving this problem.

JOURNALIST: Just coming back to Labor's announcement, the Human Services Minister Michael Keenan has said when Labor was last in power they cut 1400 jobs from the Department of Human Services, is today’s announcement about <inaudible>?

SHORTEN: Well I might get my Shadow Spokesperson, Ed Husic to talk further about this issue but I think that the current Human Services Minister Michael Keenan, he's been caught out here. There's no doubt in my mind that we've seen a lot of cuts to jobs under his watch and what's worse is we see the people who rely on human services, vulnerable Australians being treated as second class Aussies, but why don't we get Ed over to further supplement that answer.

ED HUSIC, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES:  Thanks Bill and firstly if I can congratulate Elida because Elida has really been making sure that Cairns voices are heard in the consideration of jobs in particular around DHS jobs and so well done in relation to that. The facts speak for themselves. When you look at the number of jobs in DHS under Labor and compare it to the Coalition, Labor has got a great record to talk about. Under the Coalition, what we have seen is job cuts, we've seen more use of contractors and we've seen complaints go through the roof. All they want to talk about is history and ignore the experience people are having now with Centrelink, where they are on the phone for ages, where they feel like they can't get the service that they need and where jobs are being cut and we are determined to draw a line in the sand on that and to say that, particularly in regional Australia that they get the lion’s share of these jobs that will make sure that we not only see better outcomes in terms of jobs in the economy and different parts of the country we are better service. This is an investment in service in Centrelink, and we think we've got to really tackle the damage that’s been done by the Coalition in their time there. Some of the contracting out is just extraordinary. Even the government admits that it costs more to bring in a contractor. They pay the people that work for those contractors less than what they are paying Centrelink people. The general public's experience and the inability of those contractors to meet the needs of the public are clear there is a big frustration there. So you know, the government can throw all the figures that it wants, the record speaks for itself, people's experiences speak loudly and we are determined to change all that.

SHORTEN: Thanks Ed. A couple of other questions.

JOURNALIST: These 100 new jobs, do you have any idea of how long it'll take to come in? Are we going to be waiting for years?

SHORTEN: We want to start straight away. I mean, the only problem is that the government is still the current government, so the jobs start flowing once we change the government. But I'll get Ed to talk a bit more about the roll-out.

HUSIC: There will be, just in response to your question, we'll be working with - obviously if we have the ability to form government - we'll be working with the Department to work out where we can get the jobs fast-tracked and talking with our candidates and our local members as well. They will be stepped out over the forward years, roughly the same amount each year. But we want to make sure that we get these things done right, and that we've also got to deal with a whole stack of the where you put them, how you do it, and I don't think that's the type of thing that you leave to run in the middle of a press conference, but we'll be making those calls over that period of time.

JOURNALIST: Was Cairns always on your itinerary for this Queensland tour?

SHORTEN: Yes it was. I'm - this is about my 10th visit to Cairns since I've been Opposition Leader, so therefore you can't really talk about Queensland without paying respect to Far North Queensland. And when you drive a bus 2000km, to be fair the company drove the bus, but when you go in a bus for 2000kms, and you've got 9 days, we could get as far as Townsville. But I wasn't going to let distance stop me coming to Cairns. We've got some good news for Cairns, I like Cairns. But really, Cairns has been neglected by the Federal Government over recent years. I was just reflecting on that when I was talking to an insurance broker at the airport. Look at the issues the current member just hasn't addressed - storm insurance, we know that’s one of the most difficult issues, the market is not working properly, there's insufficient offerings and it's very expensive. The current Member of Parliament for Leichhardt, you know if you had a gold coin for every time he said he was going to look into fixing the storm insurance issue you'd be a millionaire. And then I had a look at tourism more generally. I mean, this government set up the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund, the problem is they never opened the door and went out and had a look at the deals which needed to be done in Cairns itself. We've got a different vision. We intend to create a $1 billion Tourism Infrastructure Fund, because we get that tourism is a big part of the future of the far north. Again when you look at the issues around health care , you know there’s been cut backs under this government, freezes to patient rebates - these are matters of record. We are going to take a different view of health. We think that it’s far more important to choose better hospitals, not bigger multinationals. And of course in the next couple of weeks all the kids will be going back to school. The cost of living for parents is out of control. Now I read the other day that Australia now has 160 billionaires, the most ever and that’s under the current Liberal government. That is as it is, what I am worried about is that in the same time as this government has seen the creation of 160 billionaires, energy prices have gone up 20 per cent on average since the last election. Private health insurance is becoming a luxury. Everything is going up in Cairns and the far north, except wages. So I am pretty keen for us to get on and have the debate (inaudible) .. sources from the National Government, that's why for example I announced (inaudible) exciting national procurement. My fear is that if there is a contract allocated which will go to the far north, we want to make sure that whoever is bidding for the work has local content. Put another way, no local jobs, no contract. We are telling business in Australia that if you want to spend taxpayer money, important, precious taxpayer money in Far North Queensland then it's got to stay in this community. That's certainly what Elida believes and it's what we believe.
JOURNALIST: Casualisation has been something that local (inaudible).
SHORTEN: Well the best way to improve secure employment is to change the government. Perhaps we'll have to sacrifice a couple of ministers’ jobs so we can look after millions of other Australians. If that's the case, so be it. The reality is that we have a two class labour market in Australia there's about eight billion plus Aussies who are in full time work, that's good and there is nearly four billion Australians in part time work. Now some of those jobs are seasonal, that's by the nature of it you'd understand that in the Far North better than most places. But too many of our fellow Australians are in insecure work for no other reason than the current laws just permit employers to treat people as commodities. There will be people today, right around Australia and certainly in Queensland who won't find out if they've got a shift of work tomorrow until they get a text tonight. How on earth do people sink roots into communities when they are in casual and insecure work? How on earth can you get a financial loan, a car loan, a mortgage. It's very difficult to make long term plans in relationships if you live in a second class labour market where you are treated as a disposable tissue, so to speak. A disposable commodity in workplaces. Labor has got some exciting plans but the only way Labor can implement our plans for example, to make sure we train Australians rather than just import temporary labour. For example, to make sure that Australian parents can tell their kids there are apprenticeships in the future. For example where we've got council workers who work alongside labour hire workers, labour hire workers who do the same work get the same skill and are paid a lot less because of legal technicalities undermining the job security of permanent workers. The only way we can start putting some balance back into the workplace is to have an election and to vote for Elida Faith and to vote for Labor. It's no mystery to me why everything is going up except wages. Because what we have is a labour market where people don't have the ability to get wage rises so what we're seeing in Australia is an increasingly unequal society. The very rich are getting very, very rich and everyone else is dipping into household savings just to keep their - just to make ends meet. Thanks everybody, nice to talk to you.


LISA MILLAR: The Opposition Leader joins us now from Mackay in Queensland. Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning Lisa.

MILLAR: We've got a lot to get through this morning so we will get cracking Mr Shorten. But just on that story we've heard out of China, how concerned are you about the detention of this Chinese Australian writer?

SHORTEN: You can't sugar-coat this. This is an Australian citizen who has been detained in China, the Embassy has just been notified. I'm very supportive of all efforts to reach out to him, to get to the bottom of what happened - what is happening. But it is very concerning, I can't pretend otherwise.

MILLAR: What does it say about diplomatic relations that it's taken five days for Australia to be involved, or to have any access in regards to this, when the arrangement is that it's supposed to take place after three days to have communications?

SHORTEN: Yes it is disappointing Lisa. It's not the way the arrangements are meant to work. Now I don't want to do any megaphone diplomacy, we've got an Australian citizen who has been detained in circumstances we're unaware of, and it's been a slow response from the Chinese Government to talk to the Australian Government. But it is serious, it matters at times like this - I don't think I need to do any domestic politics, we are disappointed, the Opposition is disappointed that this is unfolding the way it is. We are very supportive of the Department's efforts to reach out and to get to the bottom of this. This is not the way which relations between our two countries should be conducted at all.

MILLAR: Mr Shorten in Queensland I imagine you're getting a real sense of the concern people have about the economy and the loss of jobs. You're in the heart of the mining area. Will you guarantee that you won't do anything to hamper an Adani mine, if it does get over the hurdles that still confront it?

SHORTEN: There's a couple of big hypotheticals there aren't there, Lisa. But I'll go to the Adani matter, and then I'll go to jobs in Queensland. Adani has had a number of false starts. Labor's position is that there should be no Commonwealth taxpayer money used to subsidise this project at all. A position which I might note, has now been adopted by the Federal Government. It has to stack up commercially, it has to stack up scientifically and environmentally. In the meantime, what Labor is doing is making sure that we don't put all our eggs in the basket of one project, of one company. In the last few days, in my bus tour of Queensland, Central and Northern Queensland, we've announced significant investment in infrastructure, which will generate literally hundreds and hundreds - indeed, thousands of real jobs. $800 million for example, to complete the Rockhampton Ring Road; $280 million to complete the second and final stage of the Mackay Ring Road. I visited Maryborough, not in a Labor seat, in an LNP seat which is pretty strong. But for me that doesn't matter. We visited Maryborough, the EDi Downer rail workshops, and announced our commitment to make sure that we have Australian procurement. That if we're going to spend money on rail in Australia in the next 10 years - we're going to spend $100 billion at least, I want to see those train carriages built in Australia, in Maryborough, and other locations where we build rail transport in Australia. So we're focusing on a range of different industries and jobs and to conclude this point in Queensland, we've announced significant commitments to tourism and to new sources of energy. We announced a national hydrogen plan, because we think that hydrogen is one of the alternative fuels of the future. North Asia, Japan and South Korea are already making significant, eye-watering commitments to develop hydrogen, and I want Australia to be at the front of the hydrogen race, not at the back, as we sometimes are with other technologies.

MILLAR: Mr Shorten, just in the last few moments, we have been hearing from your Deputy, Tanya Plibersek, who said about the Gilmore preselection that Warren Mundine has been very clear for the last 20 or 30 years that he wants a seat in Parliament, and he will take any party that will have him. For a long time - and I am quoting her, ‘he was desperate for the Labor Party to give him a seat in Parliament, there's a reason we didn't and the voters of Gilmore will discover that’. What is the reason?

SHORTEN: I haven't seen those remarks. But I think what you said in the preamble is correct. So I'm not going to spend my time talking about a Liberal candidate but it's correct to say that Mr Mundine wasn't successful in convincing the Labor Party to run.
MILLAR: But he was the head of the Labor Party.

SHORTEN: Well we've had plenty of administrative heads of the Labor Party who haven't ended up in Parliament. The point about it, in answering your question is that he wasn't able to convince the Labor Party to back him, and it's a free country, if he wants to run for any party, I guess being in a party, that's up to him who he chooses, if he wants to change his views. He's running in Gilmore, but doesn't it highlight the confusion and the chaos.

MILLAR: It seems to be fairly specific though Mr Shorten, that Tanya Plibersek says, there is a reason the Labor Party didn't, and leaving it up to the voters of Gilmore to discover what that reason might be?

SHORTEN: I think you just said earlier on that it was just, in very recent moments, that Tanya made that comment so, I haven't seen them. But it's a matter of record that Mr Mundine was unsuccessful in convincing the Labor Party, over many years. So he's going to try his hand in the alternative, the Liberal Party. The point about what's happened in Gilmore is they had Ann Sudmalis, then they picked another fellow, Grant Schultz. Now Mr Morrison has exercised his leadership prerogative to parachute in Mr Mundine into Gilmore. Isn't the point about this that we start 2019 the way we ended 2018? The Liberal Party are talking about themselves, they're not talking about jobs in Queensland or anywhere else. I mean, who the Liberals pick is up to them. Our candidate, Fiona Phillips, she stands on the side of no cuts to hospitals, no cuts to schools, lifting the wages. The big sentiment I get travelling around Australia Lisa, and I got it over the summer and perhaps even you've heard it in your travels, is that Australians are sick of the instability of the Government and they're also sick of the fact that everything is going up except wages.

MILLAR: Well one of the sentiments we are hearing in letters to the editor and people concerned is about the franking credits and some of the decisions you've made on taxes. Reducing what pensioners might be able to access, these small amounts. Did you make the wrong call on the franking credit decision?

SHORTEN: Listen, I don't want to get into a debate about the facts, but your last statement is 100 per cent wrong. We've made it clear that any pensioner who's in receipt of a part pension is not affected by our changes, so you can't say - I mean, you can, but it's just not right, when you say that pensioners are going to be affected, that's just not correct. The broader question of our reforms, going after multinationals, clamping down on tax loopholes which predominantly benefit just one small part of Australia, and the well-off. We can't in this country keep handing away bigger tax concessions and not better pensions. We can't keep giving away tax loopholes where we have a tax system, where depending on how clever your accountant is, paying tax becomes an option, whereas most Australians are paying increased cost of living.

MILLAR: But given the economy -

SHORTEN: So, we're committed to our reforms to make our budget sustainable.

MILLAR: Given the economy has already started changing since you made these announcements, and certainly on negative gearing, how committed are you to these policies, and are you ready for an election that is basically going to be a tax referendum?

SHORTEN: Well you can say that the election is just on one issue, but I actually think the issue for this election is making the economy work in the interest of working and middle-class people, and our policies sit four square with that; better-paid jobs, better hospitals and schools. But in terms of our changes to negative gearing, one point which gets lost perhaps in the rush of the media – digital 12-hour news cycle is this: we are grandfathering our proposals. Most people don't know quite what grandfathering means. What it means is that if you currently negatively gear under existing tax rules, there is no change to your investment. So whatever change we introduce which is to wind back negative gearing for existing houses in the future, because we don't think it's fair that first home buyers have unfair competition with investors buying their fifth or sixth property, subsidised by the government. So we are saying to Australians, if you've currently invested in property on existing rules, you are not affected. That's a very important point for us to get out. So we are committed to creating fairness for first home buyers. In this discussion about the Government's trenchant defence of people buying their seventh or tenth property and getting a taxpayer subsidy to underwrite the cost of buying investment properties, I'm standing up for the first home buyers. I want the great Australian dream of owning your first home to be a reality, not a pipedream. This is a country where once upon a time, having rich parents was relevant to your financial health, now it's fundamental to your financial health. I want first home buyers to be able to enter the market. How is it fair that you could have a property investor bidding at an auction for their -


SHORTEN: Sorry about that Lisa.

MILLAR: Can I ask you Mr Shorten, there's been a lot of talk about values and as we approach Australia Day, the Prime Minister certainly has been putting forward views. What are three values that you adhere to as a politician?

SHORTEN: Fairness. We think that Australia Day is about Australian values. I think fairness is a key value and as we approach this Australia Day, how is it fair that we have a tax system where how much money you have can determine your option to opt out of the tax system? How is it fair in this country that people's wages haven't risen, yet corporate profits have gone up by 13 per cent, wages have moved by barely 2 per cent. How is it fair that in some parts of Australia you can't access the same quality of health services that you can perhaps expect in the big cities? So fairness is a key Australian value. I think another value which I back in is opportunity. I think this has got to be a country which provides opportunity to all. I think, for example it is not providing opportunity when women don't get paid the same as men. Or where we don't have opportunity for people -  businesses in the regional Australia, to access the same NBN quality as we get in other parts of Australia. So fairness and opportunity represent some core values which I will champion. I think a final value which I would champion is actually keeping my promises. We're being up-front with the Australian people. We think that the politics in this country is in danger of being broken. A lot of Australians don't think their individual vote changes anything. They think that politicians are just in it for themselves. By putting out our policies in advance of the next election, we're not being a small target, and perhaps the Government delights in a proposition it can make up scare campaigns. But this country needs a better standard of political debate. We don't just want to win the election because we're not them, although that's not a bad reason to vote for us, because we're not divided, we're not unstable. We want to win the election because we put forward a vision for Australia. A vision in education to be the best in the world. A vision in health to be the best in the world. A vision to have renewable energy and new sources of energy to put downward pressure on prices. A vision I'll conclude Lisa, which says that this country works best when we work together, when all Australians get a fair go, when they can access opportunity, that's when I think we actually get the best out of this nation.

MILLAR: Mr Shorten, we're going to have to leave it there. Thanks for your patience with us with the link. It's one of the benefits of being able to cross to regional Australia. Thank you very much.

RUSSELL ROBERTSON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CAPRICORNIA: I'm here at the Keppel Bay Sailing Club with the Shadow Minister for Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese and the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten. We're here today backing in our commitment to match Annastacia Palaszczuk's Labor Government's commitment to $25 million to put mains power and water to Great Keppel. But we know that if we can get Great Keppel going again, the jewel in the Capricorn Coast crown, we are going to see an additional 860,000 extra tourist visits. That'll be $83 million back into the local economy to get the Capricorn Coast back to where it should be, competing with the Tropical North Coast. But that's what we need, we've seen the local member turn her back on this project. I've been working hard with Anthony and Bill to make sure that we can secure this funding to make sure we can get the Capricorn Coast back up and competitive with the Tropical North Coast. I'll throw over to Bill now and Bill will add more to the announcement. Bill?

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Russell and that was Russell Robertson, Labor's candidate in Capricornia. Great to see what we can do to help make Great Keppel Island the jewel in the Queensland tourism crown. I congratulate Brittney Lauga the local state member in the Palaszczuk Government for recognising that Great Keppel Island and the surrounding environment can be restored to its former glory. Many of us when we were younger heard all the advertising slogans about Great Keppel Island but we've heard too little for too long about it. One of the reasons is that whilst we've got bold entrepreneurs and tourism operators and small businesses hanging in there, making sure that Great Keppel Island and Yeppoon are a fantastic tourism venue, they haven't had the sort of support from Canberra which their efforts deserve. So, influenced by Russell Robertson's lobbying, talking to the local community, our own in-house tourism guru, Anthony Albanese, we've decided in Labor that if we get elected, we will provide $25 million to make sure there are secure supplies of water and energy to Great Keppel Island. This is just what the island and the surrounding area needs to be an anchor for further investment. It's interesting sometimes when you realise how a modest degree of government support repaying the tourism leaders and visionaries, can actually deliver exponentially better benefits in jobs and income for the local region. This $25 million investment to ensure these sustainable supplies of water and energy, matching Annastacia Palaszczuk's vision, what that will do is actually for $25 million is deliver $83 million of benefit every year. This is the smart use of precious and important taxpayer dollars to help build the whole Australian tourism story. Tourism is one of the unsung champions of the Australian economy. Resources are very important, agriculture is very important, defence very important but what we also need is tourism. So this investment is part of Labor's vision for tourism in Northern Australia and indeed throughout Australia. This modest investment, sensible and well argued for by Russell Robertson anchors again our commitment to tourism infrastructure fund in Australia of $1 billion and our other announcements we've made to improve tourism. And I don't mind admitting that I am patriotic about our tourism industry. I want to see more Australians take their holidays at home. But what we need to do is remove some of the impediments for Australians to have a great Aussie holiday. This is a little patch of paradise and with some modest investment, more people from Australia and around the world can share this remarkable piece of Australia. I'd now like to hand over to Anthony Albanese to talk further about this idea and our tourism initiatives for Queenslanders and jobs.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE: Thanks very much, Bill. Look it is fantastic to be back here in Yeppoon. I was here last November with Robbo, our local candidate and Brittney, the local state member for one of the 30 tourism roundtables that I've held right around the country talking with tourism operators, small and medium businesses, by and large people who have taken an enormous risk to invest their own money about what way government can provide assistance. And this is a perfect example of the role that the Commonwealth Government can do in partnership with state and local government and the private sector to drive jobs and to drive regional economic growth. This $25 million paired with the $25 million from the state government, will upgrade the energy and water security for Great Keppel Island. What that will do is anchor investment on that island, creating jobs, creating for that $50 million, one off capital investment, an ongoing benefit of $83 million each and every year growing into the future. It is symbolic of the commitment that we have to regional tourism. That's why we've created a $1 billion regional tourism infrastructure fund from the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility, so that throughout the north, its potential as a tourism magnet can be reached. One of the things that came out of the forum that we held here last November was the need for people to have secure employment in this local region, for the kids who are growing up here to see an opportunity to stay in the region. And tourism is vital for that. That's why we're concerned about making tourism a career, not just something that people do for one or two days or for one or two weeks or one or two years maybe even while they're studying. It has to be a career path, it has been identified by Deloitte Access Economics as one of the super growth sectors of the Australian economy into the future and that's why we have a vision not as tourism that's something that's forgotten and we must remember that the Coalition Government forgot to appoint a tourism minister when they were first elected and couldn't tell us what Department tourism would be located in. As it is, it's somewhere on the fourth floor of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. We'll put it back in the centre of infrastructure and transport and regional economic development because we understand that tourism is absolutely critical. And the efforts of Russell Robertson as the Labor candidate for Capricornia stand in stark contrast to the efforts of the local member, Michelle Landry. Now, the local member Coalition member described any objection to not having funding for this project as something that was just making noise. She wasn't interested in actually backing in her local community. I think it's fantastic that we've got a candidate here who not only listens to his local community but makes sure that his party, Labor under Bill Shorten, is delivering on what the local community want and indeed need.

SHORTEN: Thanks Anthony, thanks Russell, thanks Brittney. Are there any questions on this announcement or indeed any other local or national issues?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you accept that there is a cultural problem within the Victorian right and what are you going to do to boost women's representation inside your own faction?

SHORTEN: First of all, I actually want to congratulate the whole of the Labor Party for the efforts that they have made in the last decade, in particular the last five and a half years since I have been leader. Representation of women in the Labor Party is at the national level at an all-time high. Now I appreciate that if Jenny George has some further ideas about how we can further improve upon our personal best performance already, that is fine and we welcome them, we can always do better. But I would say that I'm not going to see the efforts of the national conference in 2015, where we proposed fifty-fifty and all of the women MPs in the Labor Party who have reached senior positions and indeed positions in Parliament and say that that hasn't been good, it is and I salute them. And I am going to keep working with my whole movement to further improve a fair go for women in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Why do you think it is your faction isn't pulling its weight in this regard?

SHORTEN: I think about Jo Ryan and I think about Clare O'Neill and I think about Jacinta Collins and I think about Senator Kimberley Kitching and I think about our great candidate, Jennifer Yang, along with all of the women candidates in the Labor Party, they are doing a good job. I always welcome suggestions on how we can do better, but in the Australian political scene, the Labor Party, and when you visit Question Time and you look along the ranks of the government frontbench and backbench and you look along the ranks of the Labor Party, we are doing as well as we ever have but I'm not complacent. And if we want to improve women's representation in Parliament, vote Labor at the next election because we are running a lot of women in a lot of seats.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the new Liberal candidate for the seat of Gilmore is a former National President of your party, whatever you say about opposing candidates, you'd have to admit that the new candidate needs to be a pretty competent person in light of that?

SHORTEN: Sorry?

JOURNALIST: Doesn't the fact that they have been the National President of your party speak highly of their competency?

SHORTEN: Well when someone's a Labor Party representative, I think their values and policies for Australia are very good. But the Morrison Government values and policies are not policies that I think are in the interests of the Australian people. So I would always pick the Labor candidate over the Liberal candidate. But let's go to the heart of the matter in this Federal electorate of Gilmore which is on the South Coast of New South Wales. It has been a Government seat - the current Member of Parliament is not the new candidate. It is a woman Liberal MP called Anne Sudmalis. She has had to put up her hands and say she can't continue because of the bullying within the Liberal Party. Now what we see is chaos and division. It doesn't matter what day of the week it is when you open a newspaper, a common story, a daily story, is division. The next election, and your question went to about which candidate and why to vote for them, a vote for Labor is a vote for stability. A vote for the Liberals is a vote for instability. A vote for Labor is a vote for a united party, a vote for the Liberal Party is for a vote for a divided and disunited party. To be honest, I just can't believe how every day this current government get up and muck it up. They are so focused on themselves, I don't know how they find time to do anything else.

JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen has identified a problem with workers having too many superannuation accounts. Given that part of the problem is that workers are being defaulted into different accounts through the industrial relations system, how do you propose to rectify that?

SHORTEN: Well what we did when we were in government - first of all, it's a fair point, that we don't want to have people having multiple accounts and multiple fees and charges. One of the biggest problems is that when people have wanted to merge their superannuation funds, and I am sure there is even people at this press conference who have tried to merge their funds, it was an unduly complex process and some superannuation funds would put a lot of obstacles in your way to move your money from one fund to another. A particular problem I noticed was in the life insurance, where a bank fund would, for example, have quite an elaborate life insurance scheme which you would lose if you moved. So we want to make it easier for people to move and amalgamate their funds, and we did a lot of that in government. What we also want to do is make sure that people aren't put into funds which are chronically underperforming. Now, we all know the government has had an ideological crusade to the point of boring Australia to back the banks against industry super funds. We are not interested in who runs the fund, we are interested in is the fund performing in the interests of the account holders and beneficiaries? So Chris has proposed that we need to look at the bottom quartile of fund performers. If your fund over five years, is constantly in the bottom quarter, it is time for those trustees to pull up their socks. Now, out of interest, it is just a point of technical factual data, but the bottom quarter of poorly performing super funds in Australia are run by the banks. They don't mind taking your money, they just don't like performing for it in too many cases of superannuation. So we are up for making sure that for poorly performing funds, they don't keep getting their mitts on money year in year out. We will work with the sector, we will work with consumer representatives and we will work with the Liberal Party to try and get it right. But what the Liberals have to do is if they want to be fair dinkum about delivering better returns for workers, they have go to leave their hatred of industry funds at the door, they've got to grow up and look at performance rather than who the trustees are.

JOURNALIST: Do you accept, Mr Shorten, the Treasurer's summary that Australia now faces real threats from the global economy or do you think the government is using that to try to make the economy a larger issue campaigning to the expected May election?

SHORTEN: There is no doubt there is instability on the global stage. But what worries me is that this government has squandered the last six years and not prepared Australia for any instability which could happen. This is a government who have let working Australians fall behind. At a time when savings are important, this is a government who is running wages policies, which means that people have to spend precious household savings just to keep pace. One of the ways that we inoculate us against difficulties around the world is that we make sure that the wages are moving, at least comparable to where the prices are moving. Our challenge in Australia under this government is as the world is unstable, child care prices have gone up, cost of energy has gone up, private health insurance is becoming a luxury item. This is a government who has got the economy wrong and every year in every budget they change their warnings. In 2014 Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey, remember them? They were the first attempt at the Liberals to run the country. They said austerity - they cut everything in sight. By 2016 the government's only plan became giving away money to the top end of town. And I predict in this budget coming up, they won't worry about the rest of the world, they're just going to try and spend money, to try and buy some votes to desperately get you to ignore the fact that this is a divided government who has mismanaged the economy over the last five years. Too much inequality, too much unfairness for working people, too many cuts to vital services like hospitals and education, this is a government who is not preparing Australia for the future. They are too busy fighting themselves.

JOURNALIST: And if that budget has a bottom line surplus on it, the April 2nd Budget, will you find that credible do you think? Or do you think that might be an unbelievable figure given the election context we're in?

SHORTEN: Well we will have to see the numbers, but let's say what is really going on in Australia at the moment. We have always had the budget in May. This government is bringing the budget forward unusually and they will try and spend their way to victory. They're going to spend money, they're going to spend future money to just try and buy votes now. This is a government who has stopped governing. One, they brought the budget forward early for political reasons. Two, they don't even have Parliament sit anymore. I mean, a government who can't attend Parliament is not in government. The fact that the Senate is only sitting for seven days in eight months and the House of Representatives only ten days in eight months, if any ordinary Australian going to work today said "Listen boss, you will see me for ten days in the next eight months if that is all right, thank you very much?" I  mean, it is not credible. This is a government who has run out of puff. The budget's early, they don't want to come to Parliament and they are very divided and all they can do is talk about themselves. In the meantime there are big issues out there. Everything is going up in Australia except wages. They have got no plan on climate change, energy prices are out of control. They have stopped governing - they are just worried about the next election.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, a couple of local questions. We know that these marginal seats in Central Queensland are going to be quite important but what do you see as the key issue (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Jobs. Jobs, jobs and jobs. Secure jobs. Sustainable jobs. That is why we have announced $800 million for the Rockhampton Ring Road. Because we know, that if truck traffic doesn't move through the centre of town but can move more easily, that saves costs, indeed it saves lives. We know that if we invest in the dual lane developments between Yeppoon and Rocky, that's going to recognise the fact that the coast has grown in population, it's going to make life easier. We know that if we invest money in the cardiac unit at the local hospital, that's going to improve the health outcomes for central Queenslanders and it means also they save costs and there will be jobs there. We have announced a proper policy in terms of local procurement, so when we outline our expenditures, what we're going to require is that if someone wants to get a Commonwealth contract in central Queensland, they have to have got to have a local component. There will be no local contracts unless there are local jobs. So we think that's a very solid platform when you combine it with what we will do to reverse the cuts to health care, when you look at our proposals to make sure central Queensland gets the best educational offerings possible, I think it makes sense that we're going to look after people and we're going to restore the penalty rates of workers who have had their penalty rates slashed.

JOURNALIST: Budget airlines, I'm told, are interested in reinstating direct flights from Sydney and Melbourne to Rockhampton, and once approvals are made, to Great Keppel Island. Do you see Great Keppel Island as a place that people from NSW and Victoria would like to come and visit?

SHORTEN: Oh, my word. It is a shame they didn't put Parliament up in somewhere near Rockhampton, this would be a great place to have Parliament. Australians like the Queensland coastline. They are very proud of the Great Barrier Reef. This is a superb tourist offering. I think I said earlier in my opening about the importance of domestic tourism. It would be really good if Australians could come and see their own regions and their own beautiful country, and they want to. So if we can do things to improve airline access to central Queensland, I think that is one of the missing links. If we can make it a bit easier for people to get here, then I think you will see a new wave of tourism. But this is the vision I have for Central Queensland. I might finish up with the press conference on this note. We have announced this week so far a commitment to local procurement. That means that when Commonwealth money is being spent in the regions, we will decentralise the contract so local businesses and local jobs are created. We are proposing ways of improving infrastructure. We understand that central Queensland is a resources economy, that defence plays an important role, that agriculture is fundamental to its future, but so is tourism, so is education, so is health. We look at Central Queensland and we see a diversified, exciting economy. Central Queenslanders don't want a hand-out from the government but they would like to see some of the taxes they pay to Canberra reinvested in their community. Russell Robertson doesn't take no for an answer. He has pushed this proposal, along with Brittany, the state member here, to make sure that we invest in tourism. What you need in Central Queensland is politicians who listen to you, no matter what your political perspective and fight for you. This bloke is carved from Capricornia. He has worked in nearly every town in Capricornia, third generation coal miner. He is exactly what the political doctor ordered for people in Central Queensland who are sick of being treated as LNP heartland. On that positive note, I have a bus to catch. Thanks everybody.

RUSSELL ROBERTSON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CAPRICORNIA: I want to thank the Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and the Leader of the Opposition Bill Shorten and the shadows for coming out with the local members Barry O'Rouke and Britney Lauga. They're helping me here today back in the Rocky Ring Road. The project that will not only Rockhampton safer but more liveable. It takes trucks off the road. This is a project started by Labor and it's going to be finished by Labor. We've seen the LNP only commit to this after they were cornered by the Labor Party to make sure they made Rockhampton a more liveable city. Only Labor can generate safe and secure jobs. I’m going to ask Bill Shorten to have a few words, Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, that was Russell Robertson, Labor's candidate for Capricornia. Of course we're here also with Zac Beers, Labor's candidate for Flynn, and we've got Anthony Albanese and Brendan O'Connor and Murray Watt here, and we are always, always happy federally to do a press conference with Queensland's fantastic Premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk. I'm pleased this afternoon to confirm federal Labor's commitment to $800 million to finally build the Rockhampton Ring Road. This will generate 780 direct jobs for locals. It'll ease congestion and it'll improve Rockhampton's economic fortunes, and it'll generate jobs locally. Labor are the architects of the Rockhampton Ring Road project. It was Anthony Albanese, when we were last in government, who commissioned the $10 million business case that finally got the ball rolling. And today I'm happy to close that circle and say that a Shorten Labor Government will invest $800 million into the Rockhampton Ring Road. Because we want jobs, jobs, jobs for Queenslanders. And we want to secure, good jobs for local businesses, small businesses in Rockhampton and the surrounding district. It's now my privilege to pass over to Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, and then Anthony Albanese, our Shadow Minister for Infrastructure, he's going to talk about disturbing developments and revelations that the Coalition Government in Canberra are proposing a cut of $700 million for the Bruce Highway construction funds.

ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: Thanks Bill and it's lovely to join Bill here in Rockhampton. And of course, you know, Bill is a great friend to Queensland and what I like to see is when Bill comes to Queensland, he makes commitments that are fundamentally about long term secure jobs. Over 700 jobs with the Rocky Ring Road. And today I'm pleased to announce that my Government will invest $200 million to make sure that this becomes a reality. Early construction will be able to commence in 2021. All the detailed planning will happen. And this will be what the Rockhampton residents have been asking for. We know how important the Bruce Highway is. It is the artery of Queensland. It is the connectivity of the road that connects all of our regional cities up and down our coast.  It is absolutely vital. And I really want to thank Bill for coming along today. Someone who I can work with. Someone who wants to deliver for Queensland. Someone who I know will also put Queensland first, just as much as I do and my local members do. This is about partnership and working together, and it is great to see now that we are getting the infrastructure money that we need from Bill, if Bill is elected as Prime Minister at the next election.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE: Thanks very much. It is great to be here with Bill Shorten, the Labor leader, and Annastacia, the Queensland Premier, and our local candidates Russell and Zac, here today for this fantastic announcement. It symbolises if anything, what's on the Bill Bus: jobs, not cuts. That's what Labor stands for. And today we've made this $800 million commitment from Federal Labor and a $200 million commitment from the Queensland Labor Government for the Rockhampton Ring Road, which arose out of the study that was commissioned when we were in government. What we know from the last fortnight is that we've had answers from Senate Estimates showing that even though the Government committed $3.5 billion for the Bruce Highway in Budget announcements, in their budget nights, the actual figures have been reduced to $2.8 billion over the next three financial years. A $700 million cut. Not in difference from what Labor would have done, but on their own commitments that they've made on budget nights. It's a part of the $5 billion of cuts that they've made for major projects, the Black Spots Program, heavy vehicle safety program, rail projects right around the country. This is a government that is simply incompetent and can't even deliver what itself says it would do on budget night. So one of the things that people should be wary of if Scott Morrison gets to budget on April the 2nd, is to be wary because if you look at their record, they haven't been able to deliver on what they said they would do. And what that means quite simply, is less jobs created here in Queensland, less fixing of the Bruce Highway. When you look at when we were last in government, we commenced construction on the Mackay Ring Road, the Cairns Southern Approaches, Cooroy to Curra, the work around Gladstone we did. All of this work right up and down the Bruce Highway. And I look forward, as a Minister in a Bill Shorten Labor Government, to working with the Queensland Labor Government on delivering yet again.

SHORTEN: Thanks Anthony and Premier and Robbo, are there questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, in the Rockhampton Morning Bulletin today, Russell Robertson was quoted saying he would support building more thermal coal fired power plants. Do you support the same thing? Do you guys see eye to eye?

SHORTEN: Well there's two issues there. First of all let's talk about my candidate Russell Robertson. He's a coal miner, he's a third generation coal miner. His father was a coal miner. His grandfather was a coal miner. Russell has worked in just about every town right across the Capricornia electorate. The Capricornia electorate is one 91,000 square kilometres. He's a coal miner. This is one thing which the Coalition get confused when they talk about mining. Gina Rinehart is a mine owner, BHP are mine owners. Russell Robertson is actually a miner, and we are the party of working people. And now let me talk about coal. Coal will have a future in Australia. It must. And anyone who says there's no future for coal is kidding themselves and kidding the Australian people. I want to put on the record that the resources is not just coal but indeed LNG, and hard rock, metalliferous mining, has been part of what good news there is in the Australian economy at the moment with their exports, particularly into North Asia. So we are going to keep exporting coal - that's just a fact - and no matter of people saying otherwise is going to change that. We're still going to use coal in our energy mix in Australia as well. As for individual mines, well it's got to stack up. It's got to stack up legally, it's got to stack up environmentally, it's got to stack up commercially. I'm not in the business of picking winners in the coal industry. But what I won't do is be deterred from investing in renewable energy as well. Climate change is real, the threat to the reef is real. And a Labor government I lead is going to modernise our economy, diversify our economy, and we're heading to 50 per cent renewables under a government that I lead by 2030. Any other questions?

JOURNALIST: David Littleproud's announced that an independent panel will assess the Darling River fish kill. Are you happy with this announcement? What do you make of it?

SHORTEN: The Government's announced to get an independent set of scientists to tell us what's happening with the terrible fish kills in New South Wales. That's a good idea. We thought of it already. I wrote to the Prime Minister two weeks ago. They weren't interested then. We publicly engaged with the  Australian Academy of Science, the Government again said they weren't interested. But they finally got the memo. Do you know, parliament's sitting on February the 12th. It's a national disgrace that it's only sitting for 10 days before the next election. But one of the items which the parliament must consider is an explanation to the Australian people, why we're seeing a million fish deaths in our biggest river system. I've asked the Australian Academy of Scientists because the Government wouldn't do their day job, which is govern Australia. I asked our experts, give me the best and smartest people, whatever you report to us we will make public in the Parliament. I'm happy for the Government to be part of our process, because people deserve the facts. The death of fish is not a Liberal issue or a Labor issue, it's a national issue, and I want to get the smartest people in the country, and the Government shouldn't be afraid of science, they should embrace science.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten do you commit to the same Cook anniversary funding that the Government has confirmed this morning in the Prime Minister's visit to Cooktown, if you're in government after May?

SHORTEN: I came to Queensland to announce tens of thousands of jobs, a brand new industry, the hydrogen industry. Mr Morrison has come to Queensland to get his historical facts wrong. Captain Cook landed on the East Coast. I get that, we acknowledge that. Cooktown and 1770 and Agnes Water are having local commemorations of it. But I tell you what, I've travelled all over Queensland in the nearly six years I've been Opposition Leader. I've held many town hall meetings. I've literally spoken to tens of thousands of Queenslanders. No one has told me they want a replica boat to cruise around Australia. What they've told me is they want better hospitals and better schools. They want want wages to start moving again. They want to reform labour hire. They want to make sure that we have good infrastructure along the Bruce Highway. Listen, I'm not going to get caught in some sort of bizarre Captain Cook fetish which Mr Morrison wants me to engage in. Yes, Captain Cook was an English navigator, a very notable navigator and he landed on the East Coast. For the record, he circumnavigated New Zealand, not Australia. That's fine, that's our history. But I'm not obsessed about our history. I'm obsessed about our future. I want to make sure that if we've got scarce taxpayer dollars, I make sure that your parents can get into aged care if they need it, that Australian kids get a quality education and get an apprenticeship. I want to make sure that you can drive up and down the Bruce Highway safely. That is why, I have to say, with no small amount of pride, that Russell Robertson is our flag bearer candidate here, working with a remarkable State Government. The Labor Party is the party of Capricornia and Rockhampton. Our announcement today of $800 million comes on top of our announcement of $176 million  for the Rookwood Weir. It comes on top of our announcement to build a dual laneway, start the work of a dual laneway between Rockhampton and Yeppoon. It comes on top of our $25 million commitment to build a levee so that parts of Rockhampton don't get the dreadful inundation they had previously. It comes on top of our announcement of $7.2 million for a new cardiac unit at the Rockhampton Hospital. I'm more obsessed about sick people in Rockhampton getting the cardiac health they need, rather than a boat trip around Australia. But that's Mr Morrison's priorities and I'm not buying into it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten one other, your colleague Anthony Albanese just referred to if the Government makes the 2 April Budget. Do you seriously think there is any doubt that the Government would survive to April 2nd as Mr Albanese seems to, and if so, what's going to happen in the one and a half sitting weeks of Parliament we do have between now and then?

SHORTEN: Tim, if every other Australian did as little work as the Morrison Government, they'd lose their job. It is a national disgrace that this government is only sitting for a total of 10 days before the election. Parliament is a fundamental part of the Australian democracy. A government who can't govern Parliament is not in government. The fact that this government is trying to make Parliament irrelevant shows that they're not wanting to face accountability. It shows that they've run out of puff as a government. We don't even know who's going to turn up in the Liberal Party at the next parliamentary sitting. They're moving on, they're working out their post parliamentary plans. This is a government unstable, divided, and focused on themselves. But I want to reassure Australians that whenever this election is held, be it in March, be it in April, or be it by May the 18th, the Labor Party's ready. We've worked for six years, we're stable, we're united, we're in touch with the issues the people want. And we're going to build the Rockhampton Ring Road which has been dragged on far too long. Thanks everybody.
ZAC BEERS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FLYNN: Okay, thanks everyone for coming along. It's great to be hear in Gladstone today and I want to welcome a number of special guests to our region. Today we've got Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk here with us along with Opposition Leader Bill Shorten and a big crew from the Labor team. We've got Jason Clare, Brendan O'Connor, Pat Conroy. I'd also like to acknowledge Glenn Butcher the state member who's here with us today and Matt Burnett, Gladstone's Mayor. Look today we've got a fantastic announcement about the future of energy and the future of jobs in this region. Today Labor's announcing a massive commitment to the hydrogen industry, an industry that will grow into the future and create thousands of jobs for people right across Australia provided we get in front of it and that's what today is all about. Today is about putting our stake in the ground and saying Gladstone will be the hub for hydrogen into the future, Gladstone will be where we make hydrogen, where we export hydrogen and where we power the world. Today's announcement is about delivering important investment into critical infrastructure like the Hydrogen Innovation Hub which will be based here in Gladstone to make sure that we research the technology to get the commercialisation right in partnership with industry, to make certain that when hydrogen gets off the ground, it gets off the ground in Gladstone and in a big way. Because we understand that in this region jobs are vital and it's important that we diversify our economy and make sure that we're powering the future. Today's announcement will do just that and I'll hand to Bill to talk a little bit more about what we're announcing today.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Great candidate, Zac Beers. I acknowledge the presence of my federal Labor colleagues and of course Australia's favourite Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk. I'd like to thank our hosts here at Northern Oil Recycling. This is a really exciting announcement today. Today Federal Labor is saying it's about time that Australia entered the hydrogen race. We have a vision for Australia in the future which is one where hydrogen is one of our energy sources and one of our great exports. It's the equivalent dare I say of LNG 2.0 and we want to make Queensland and Gladstone ground zero for hydrogen technology in this nation. Our policy today is about jobs, jobs, jobs, secure jobs, in Gladstone, in Queensland and indeed across Australia. Our vision for hydrogen as an emerging source of energy means that we will commit if elected, over a billion dollars to fund research, equity, to make sure that our projects in Australia can scale up. Hydrogen is an emerging and exciting source of energy across the world. By 2020 Japan has already set a target that they want to have 40,000 electric vehicles powered by hydrogen fuel cells. South Korea too and Hyundai are making similar commitments right now. It's estimated by experts there'll be two billion electric vehicles by 2045. Two billion. Half of these vehicles will be powered by hydrogen fuel cells. Australia is at a crossroads, you know it's even the well-known local identity and head of the Gladstone Ports Corporation Leo Zussino on one of my many visits here to Gladstone, alerted me to the possibilities of Gladstone being a hub for energy and hydrogen energy. But when you think about the future, we need to prepare for it and Australia is it that crossroads. Do we just business as usual? Wait till some other country has a good idea, some other country decides to develop it and research it, some other country decides to pioneer and manufacturing new energy sources and we just remain yet again some sort of distant quarry. Well that's not the vision I have for a modern Australia. This industry is estimated that when it's going, generate ten billion dollars a year, 16,000 jobs. I want Australia and Queensland to be at the front of the hydrogen revolution not behind it. I want us to catch the wave of the future and invest in technology which the whole world desperately wants. It's very exciting, what we see at this very facility is the use of the best Australian science, Australian entrepreneurialism. Our policy today of a National Hydrogen Strategy I think demonstrates the sort of government we will be. We will identify a benefit for the Australian people, we will take a long term lasting position. And we'll also be courageous in the fact that we'll back it in. I've got no doubt that there'll be some who will say we should ignore hydrogen until someone else has the good idea. Well that's not my view of Australia. This country needs to grasp its opportunities. We need to add value. This is worth billions of dollars and even more than that, it's jobs, jobs, jobs, secure jobs for Queenslanders and for Australians. Now it's my great pleasure to hand over to one of the most innovative leaders in Australian politics, Annastacia Palaszczuk to talk further about this exciting vision for Queensland, for Australia using the hydrogen revolution.

ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: Thanks Bill and thanks for coming to Gladstone today. From the outset can I say when you are talking about long term secure jobs you need to be pursuing the industries of the future. It was a Labor Government that actually talked about the LNG industry and we delivered an LNG industry for Queensland. Hydrogen is the next big industry, for not just Queensland but Australia. It means long term secure jobs. As Premier and Trade Minister, I've travelled to South Korea and Japan, I've met with the leading experts when it comes to advancing this new technology. Hydrogen is it. Hydrogen is something that Germany, South Korea and Japan are actively pursuing. When I was in South Korea, I was able to drive the hydrogen car. These cars are the future of what's coming. And we can either ignore it or we can become part of this secure future. So this is a great announcement today from Bill Shorten. And what I get from Bill is the great vision to be able to work with Queensland to deliver these long term secure jobs. As we know, Queensland is a very decentralised state and our regions are absolutely crucial. This will play a key role in developing jobs here in Gladstone and up and down the coast. Already, the Tokyo Minister for the Olympics has said to me that they looking at powering vessels in time for the Tokyo Olympics and they want Queensland and Australia to be part of that hydrogen future. So as we know, we did it with LNG and we can definitely do it with hydrogen. So Bill thank you very much for coming to Queensland and I look forward to working with you now and many days into the future.

SHORTEN: I and my Federal team are happy to take questions, I should acknowledge the work that Assistant Shadow Minister Pat Conroy has done on this work too. Open for questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, what do you make of Matt Canavan's comments this morning that this is just a distraction from your abandonment of Central Queensland's coal industry?

SHORTEN: Poor old government ministers at the moment. Why is it that when there's a good idea, they immediately react with the lowest common denominator of attacking it. Hydrogen is an energy source of the future. I would have thought if you were a Queensland Senator you'd be backing Queensland rather than standing in the path of Queensland and Australia's progress. If we miss the hydrogen wave then future generations of Australians won't thank us. This summer, one of the problems which people identified to me about Australian politics is, they say where's the vision. What's the over the horizon thinking? I'm completely bullish and positive about our national hydrogen announcement. It's an emerging source of energy. Industrial powerhouses like Japan are gearing their whole economy to hydrogen. This is not science fiction. Maybe 10 and 20 and 30 years ago it would have just been called a pipe dream. But the problem is that Mr Canavan is not reading the latest scientific journals. He's not following what's happening overseas. We have got a marvellous opportunity to invest in jobs, to invest in the future of Australia through investing in hydrogen and technology. When the Government ministers come out and bag Labor's vision for the future, it speaks volumes for their lack of respect for Australian science, their lack of respect for Australian entrepreneurialism and the biggest problem underwriting that is we have a Government who has run out of ideas. They want to write Australia small, they want to say that the future's too hard and pull up the drawbridge, let's not worry about it, let's wait and watch the world go past us. Well I'm not prepared to do that. Queensland and Annastacia Palaszczuk have put Queensland in a very positive position. The investors behind this company have backed in their dream and their view about the future by investing their own money in this business. What Australians desperately need, blue collar workers, designers, white collar workers, entrepreneurs, small businesses, communities such as Gladstone, you need a government in Canberra who's got some courage. So as I said in my opening, I've got no doubt that the knockers will emerge, say hydrogen is too hard, we shouldn't worry about the future. We, I promise Australians will be a different sort of government. We'll listen to the best science, we'll listen to the smartest business people, we'll back in Australian ingenuity, we'll work with the council, the local community and we'll work with the Queensland Government. So Mr Canavan can throw all the bricks he wants. I'm not waiting for the LNP to join the 21st century, we're getting on with business.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten how concerned are you about the revised growth forecasts from the IMF and from China and what can you say to reassure Australians who were worried that a Shorten Government might not be the best government to manage an economy in some global, in the midst of global trouble?

SHORTEN: Well actually Australians didn't need the IMF to tell them that our economy is fairly mediocre at the moment. There's some bright spots, but for too many Australians our economy isn't delivering the dividends. Most Australians actually like our plan. Our plan for better hospitals, not bigger tax loopholes. Our plan for better schools, not profits automatically for big banks. Our plans for a better deal for pensioners not simply more and richer billionaires. This economy is not working the way it should right now after five and a half years of Coalition mismanagement. Australian families are spending more of their household incomes just to make ends meet. We've got an economy where everything is going up except people's wages. I can assure you for ten million working Aussies - people in insecure employment, people who haven't had a pay rise for years - they already know that things aren't going the way they should, and we can reassure Australians we've got a plan to lift wages. We've got a plan to give fair dinkum tax relief to ten million working Aussies. We'll make sure that when you get sick you can afford to see the doctor and you can get quality health care. I promise working Australians I'll make sure your kids get a quality apprenticeship, they'll get a quality education. If they want to find an apprenticeship we'll help them find one. I can say to older Australians who feel left behind by this government because, if they're on the aged care waiting list, we will reduce those waiting lists. The trick to making our economy robust in a global environment, is to make sure that you bring people with you. If most Australians, if all Australians can get a fair go, if they can get access to opportunity, that is the best insurance Australia has for global shocks.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, what do you make of Clive Palmer taking his business in New Zealand and does it lead credence to Tony Abbott's suggestion that people should vote for a major party, any major party over an independent?


SHORTEN: So I made a promise to myself in the New Year, a New Year's resolution about Clive Palmer. Until he pays the workers what he owes them, until he pays the creditors what he owes them, until he repays the taxpayers what he owes them, I don't talk about Clive Palmer. With Clive Palmer I've learned the hard way. Always identify what his self-interest is before you take anything else seriously about what he says. So that's seriously enough about Clive Palmer we’ve got better things to talk about. But going to Mr Abbott's point, I very rarely find myself agreeing with Tony Abbott but he's right. Don't vote independent, vote Labor.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten can I ask you just about the two separate issues. First one –  how quickly would this come on stream and to be actually in a position to export hydrogen and would those jobs be ongoing jobs? What sort of jobs would they be? And on a completely separate issue, is spending several million dollars having the replica Endeavour circumnavigate Australia a good way of commemorating Captain Cook, who didn't do it?

JOURNALIST: What I'll do is, I might give Pat a run on the issues about the implementation. Suffice to say, if we get elected, we'll get down to work day one. I promise Australians that when we get in, we're not going to review everything and then come back at the end of three years and say "well we've checked everything out." We're going to be an active government. We can roll out our mandate from day one, but let me get Pat to talk further about the mechanics of what we're doing, our equity proposition, our research proposition, and our financing proposition to help businesses scale up in this exciting, dynamic, new frontier of energy and jobs in Australia.

PAT CONROY: Thanks Bill. So on when can we start exporting hydrogen, Southern Oils behind us have announced that they're planning in the next couple of years to be exporting hydrogen. So the opportunity is right now, and it's only going to get bigger. By 2022 the global market  will be worth $215 billion dollars, and it'll just scale up and and scale up and scale up. So our plan is about supporting this industry from  RND, through $90 million from ARENA, taking concessional equity where it makes sense, through $40 million for the innovation fund to a billion dollars to help scale up the industry through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. And on what sort of jobs they are, they’re from research and development, to scientists, to engineers, to storing the hydrogen after you've produced it, to transporting it overseas and ships the equivalent of the LNG carriers right now. So this is the equivalent of the LNG industry coming back for a second time and it's very exciting opportunity for Australia. We're in direct competition with countries like Norway and Qatar that are investing serious dollars right now and that's why we need to leapfrog them.

SHORTEN: Thanks Pat. On Mr Morrison's replica vessel, let me just say I appreciate that Captain Cook's landing on the Australian Queensland coastline is a matter of great importance to the people in Cooktown, indeed to the people of 1770 and Agnes Water. I know that for example the Queensland Government of Premier Palaszczuk put forward a quarter of a million dollars to help with some of these commemorations. So that's good and it's a replica vessel trip around Australia, that sounds very nice in 2020/21. Good. But let me also be clear. I'm here today announcing the future for Australia - a national hydrogen policy, 16,000 jobs, $10 billion dollars worth of investment. Now I think we've got to respect our history and what happened in 1770 but I'm also interested in what happens in Australia in 2070. We're planning for the future here today. The best scientific minds in Australia tell us that hydrogen is an exciting new source of energy. The smartest business people in Australia say that we can, if the government gives support, plan for the long term and invest in jobs in Gladstone, Queensland and Australia. I take an interest in making sure that I can offer future generations of Australians the best planning a government can do now. If Japan is investing a lot of its industrial investment in hydrogen and hydrogen fuel cells to power motor vehicles, I'm interested. I'm interested. I don't want Australia to miss another opportunity. I don't want us to see another wave of change. We've wasted 10 years on climate change because this country can't get its act together at the national level. I know that Australians are sick and tired of a lack of vision in Australian politics - well, we're giving them vision. We're giving them vision today in national hydrogen policy. I also just make the point that Mr Morrison's had a lot to say about Australia Day. It's part of a conservative rite of passage that you talk about your views on Australia Day. Well one thing I think about Australia Day is it should represent Australian values, and there is no stronger Australian value than fairness. And it is not fair when everything is going up in Australia except people's wages. It is not fair when households are struggling to pay for the return to school costs and dipping into household savings because there's no wages movement. It is not fair in Australia, if you've got parents who are waiting to get aged care support, or your child can't get an apprenticeship, or your kids have got to leave regional Queensland to go to Brisbane to get a job. So if we're going to talk about Australia Day, in my opinion nothing can be fairer than having a fair dinkum wages policy and a fair dinkum platform which looks after the health and education of Australians not just some of the things which the Conservatives delight in talking about.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten what are your thoughts on Warren Mundine running for the Liberal seat of Gilmore?

SHORTEN: Well, he was unsuccessful in the Labor Party, so, it's a free country you can run for whatever party'll have you. But I do make this point about the seat of Gilmore. The Liberal Party replaced a woman with a man, and a man and wants support nuclear reactors into Australia, including Jervis Bay. I just don't think they get how everyday Australians think.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, I've got a question about -

SHORTEN: I did say - perhaps a local question?

JOURNALIST: With the $3 million innovation hub for hydrogen <inaudible> and how can you guarantee that this policy will secure local jobs?

SHORTEN: Well, I'll get Pat to supplement this. But on the innovation hub for Gladstone, you know I've been favourably impressed in my frequent visits to Gladstone, that the Gladstone community is a community who doesn't wait for things to happen, that they drive their future. When I was a union rep I came up here and saw the construction of new facilities. This is much more than a one trick town. The Mayor is here, Glenn is here, Zac is here, these are local boys bred and raised. I understand that the history of Gladstone has been to invest in new and emerging industries. So you know what? Gladstone has done the hard work. They deserve an innovation centre, a Centre of Excellence. Gladstone is also very fortunate that they've got such a dynamic Premier as Premier Palaszczuk. She doesn't wait for every other state to work out what's going on and then get their permission. She just goes for it for Queensland. Queenslanders are smart, they back themselves, we are backing the smarts of Queensland by putting the innovation centre not in Canberra, but in Gladstone. You know congratulations again to Leo and the crew down in the Ports Corporation who have done a fair bit of work and indeed Zac Beers who's always at us to make sure that whatever we have planned for Australia, remember there's Gladstone, it's the port way to the world. Thanks everybody. See you soon.

ZAC BEERS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FLYNN: Good afternoon. Look, it's great to be in Bundaberg today. I'm here with Bill Shorten, Labor's leader, Catherine King, Labor's Shadow Health Minister, and Richard Pascoe, Labor's fantastic candidate for Hinkler. It's great to be in Bundaberg today, making a significant announcement about investment in community mental health services in this part of the world. It's great to be here with Bill and Catherine, making it clear that only a Labor government will invest in health services to make sure that communities like Bundaberg, and the broader region around Bundaberg, get the investment in services that they need. We've got a great announcement here today, and I'll let Bill and Catherine talk about the detail, but one thing is clear: a Labor government will make the necessary investment in health services in this region, to make sure that the people who live in this part of the world get access to the care that they need, particularly closer to home, right here in Bundaberg. I'll hand it over to Bill to walk us through the announcement.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Zac, or as I affectionately call him, Mr. Flynn. Zac Beers, Labor's Candidate in Flynn, and of course, Richard Pascoe, representing Labor in the seat of Hinkler. Today, I'm accompanied by Catherine King, who will take you through most of the detail of what I'm about to announce. But I'm really pleased that on our Queensland Jobs Not Cuts bus tour, we had the chance to see, firsthand, the fantastic work that they're doing here in Wide Bay and Bundaberg Hospital. One thing we do know, and we've consulted extensively with local health experts in the local community, is that the Bundaberg and Wide Bay area is crying out for more community mental health resources. Mental health still suffers a big stigma in the community, and in regional Australia they don't get their fair share of community health resources right now. So, I'm really pleased to announce that after significant consultation and work by our shadow ministers, talking to the locals and, of course, Senator Anthony Chisholm, who's here, I'm in a position to be able to announce that, if Labor was elected at the next election, we would provide $15.7 million for a new community mental health facility in Bundaberg. This is long overdue resources, and it's certainly going to help, I think, the medical and health services in the Wide Bay area provide the sort of care which every Queenslander deserves, every Australian deserves. Labor's vision for health in this country is it's your Medicare card, not your credit card, which determines your access to quality health care. Mental health is just as important as any other part of the health field. We want to make sure that, in regional Queensland, people don't face the massive travel times to get care, which they currently do in the Wide Bay region. The Wide Bay region is marked by a whole lot of socioeconomic indicators, which essentially boil down to the fact that they need more medical resources in this district. I'd now like to pass over to Catherine to talk further about Labor's exciting announcement for community mental health facilities for Bundaberg and the surrounding region.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, Bill. It's terrific to be here with Zac, Richard, and also Anthony, who represents us up here as part of the Senate team. This is a terrific announcement for Bundaberg Hospital. We've just had a brief tour of the hospital, talked to some of the staff, both in their clinical team as well as in the workforce recruitment team, and they do a fantastic job. But what we know is that hospitals do need resources. The Turnbull, sorry, I meant to say Turnbull Government, then the Morrison Government - I get confused on a day-to-day basis, as well, about that. The Morrison Government has cut, over the term of the existing hospital agreements, some $3 million from this hospital. That means that there are less outpatient visits, less emergency department, people can be seen, and that really does make a difference. But what Labor wants to do is invest in this hospital. The $15.7 million announcement that we have made today will go towards ensuring better mental health capacity here in the community. We know that many people who suffer from mental health challenges often end up in our emergency departments. We know that they often do need acute services, and some of the funding will go towards increasing acute beds for mental health patients. But more importantly, what it's going to do is make sure that we're able to care for people in the community, so that they don't end up in the emergency department here at a very, very, busy hospital, and that they're able to receive the care in their community. I particularly want to acknowledge Richard's advocacy for this project. He cares passionately about this hospital, passionately about this community, and I want to thank him for bringing this project to us. Also, briefly, I want to mention an announcement we made today about Cairns Hospital. $60 million to support the Cairns University Hospital, really taking that hospital into becoming a tertiary hospital, working to ensure that they are able to retain and recruit the health workforce that they need in that part of this fantastic state. It's a terrific announcement. I'm heading up to make some further announcements in Cairns tomorrow, but it is an announcement that we're very proud to have supported in Cairns, and know that our local candidates, whether it be Zac, whether it be Richard, whether it be Elida up in Cairns, really are championing the state of Queensland.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Catherine. Now, I might just, because we had the opportunity to talk to some of our national friends at Maryborough, as we made our exciting announcement on procurement, invite the local journalists or the local media to take over.

JOURNALIST: The mental health of locals here is important, but this facility, this hospital is 100 years old, so the State Government's currently looking at a business plan to see if it's viable to get a new hospital. We already know that the hospital is needed, so is the Federal Government, the Labor Government, if elected, going to do anything about that, to help our State Government to pay for a new hospital?

SHORTEN: Thanks for that. We had a fantastic briefing from the Wide Bay Health Services area leadership, and they certainly made a very strong case for the need to put extra resources. Now, as you correctly identify, the decision falls with the State Government of Queensland, but we were talking about, for instance, where would be the site of our new mental health building that we're contributing. What I understand is that the Wide Bay health area is going to have their business case done by about April, but they certainly made it clear that, Wide Bay, just because it's not in a big city, shouldn't be assumed to be a rich or everyone's doing really well here. There are significant pockets of disadvantage, and there are significantly unfair health outcomes in this region, from obesity right through to so many other services. The point which Wide Bay health officials made to us clearly in our briefing before was that people spend a lot of money traveling to get health care out of the region. Now, people are happy to pay the money, on one level - their health is important. But it's an inefficient waste of literally $100 million a year, they told us. So we get that this hospital is built in a flood area, and anyone who can remember the 2013 flood here saw how it's precarious, so therefore, there's no doubt that change needs to happen. The good news for the Queensland Government and Wide Bay Health is that only a Labor Government, nationally, can be trusted not to cut health care and hospital funding. Catherine, before, said that the current LNP administration lead by whoever, today or yesterday or last week. They've cut $3 million from the Bundaberg Hospital. Now, we saw the fantastic staff and all of us were lucky enough to meet with some of them today. This is a staff who have had to rebuild the reputation of this hospital from some pretty tough circumstances. Anyone walking around sees that this a hospital with old bones; that, certainly, the facilities need to upgrade. So, Federal Labor would be a very good ally of Queenslanders, because we will find scarce money in the budget to work to work to improve health funding in this state, rather than provide better tax loopholes for big multinationals and people who already very well off.

JOURNALIST: These announcements that you've made throughout the state including in our region today, will they be honoured if you do form government but the local members aren't elected?

SHORTEN: Yes. What we're promising is what we're going to do. I have to say, I think, I know people get frustrated with day-to-day politics, but where in Wide Bay, if you look at the political pundits would say that the electorate of Hinkler, is probably well-known for voting more LNP than not for many years. But when I come to Bundaberg, I don't see LNP written on the map here, and I don't see Labor written. When I talk to health care workers or parents or patients, I don't see an LNP voter or a Labor voter, I see Queenslanders. This is a fantastic area. There's a lot of good news in this town. There's a lot of good news in this region, from agribusiness right through to education and health and all sorts of services. But I am absolutely 100 per cent committed to making sure that your postcode is not a predictor of your health. We will honour our promises, because we think that the health of every Australian, wherever they live, matters.

JOURNALIST: The LNP is saying that, if you vote them in again, their national health fund will give $8 billion to Queensland Health and more. It's not as much as the $15 million you're promising for the mental health facility here. What do you say about that?

SHORTEN: Well, I guess, the LNP's now had - I'll get Catherine to supplement this, because she's a wizard on these issues - the LNP has had six years now. This is my sixth January as Opposition Leader. If things are going to be so much greater under them, they've had six years to prove it, but in that time, we've seen the freeze on the Medicare patient rebate. We've seen private health insurance premiums go up and up and up, where it's practically becoming a luxury item. The fact of the matter is there have been cuts to hospital funding. The LNP have had, now, six years to prove if they're fair dinkum on health. Labor has made tough economic decisions. We are winding back unsustainable tax concessions that mainly benefit the top end, so that we can create room in a scarce budget to provide proper health care. But I might get Catherine to talk a bit more about some of the cuts they've done in the health system, and why, really, time's up for the LNP, because they've had six years, and they just haven't done what they said they would do.

KING: The LNP has been incredibly damaging to health across the country. We've had cuts to our public hospitals, including cuts to funding that was designed to improve waiting times for emergency departments and elective surgery. Millions of dollars cut from those programs. But we've also had cuts to public dental programs. Some of the most vulnerable people in our community trying to get assistance with dentures are not able to get assistance, because of the cuts of this government to the national partnership agreement on public dental. Cuts to prevention. You'd think if any one spend in health would be important, it's actually programs to help us lose weight, to stop smoking, to cut down on alcohol. They cut funding to those. The Medicare freeze has cut $3 billion out of the patient's rebate. That's $3 billion dollars less for people able to access services for Medicare, or for doctors to be able to provide those services. All of that matters, because at the end of that, are people who are suddenly finding themselves having to pay more and more for their health care, whether it's seeing a doctor, or whether it's being able to access dental care, or whether they're trying to get access to public hospital services and outpatients. That's what the LNP has done, and they don't deserve to be re-elected here.

SHORTEN: Alright. No more questions?

JOURNALIST: Yeah. I just have a quick question for Cairns. The Morrison Government has pledged $60 million to make the Cairns Hospital a university training hospital. Is this a commitment your government will follow through if elected?

SHORTEN: Catherine's going to go up and make further announcements tomorrow, but we’ve announced we will provide $60 million. $10 million to help with the purchase of the land, and $50 million for the construction of the new university hospital. The Government is coincidentally looking at our itinerary, and they're trying to rush in 24 hours earlier to make an announcement. Can I just say, that's fine? That's the way the system should work. We don't mind setting the pace for good health care in this country. We don't mind if the Government borrows our ideas and implements them, that's fine. But I can promise Queensland just one thing: when it comes to health care, we're going to prioritize your health care over bigger banks and better tax concessions for multinationals. We will always be a better bet in health care, nationally, because we think that the health of Queenslanders is more important than the bottom line of tax-dodging multinationals seeking to send Australian money overseas, when they should pay taxes in Australia.

JOURNALIST: The rollout of the cashless debit card starts in Hinkler next week. If elected, what are you going to do? Are you going to roll it back, or is it going to continue as currently planned?

SHORTEN: If elected, it is our intention to roll it back. It mightn't be possible to unscramble all the parts of the egg, if they've got some costs on IT or some costs on Canberra bureaucrats to help administer the system. We can't necessarily save all the money that they've spent, but it is our intention to roll it back.

JOURNALIST: Wouldn't rolling it back cost a lot of money, and why do you think that's necessary to do?

SHORTEN: Well, this government's proposing to spend $13.5 million dollars to save some money. It doesn't stack up. They prematurely rushed it, in terms of not waiting to see the full review of how it would work. I think, and the experts tell me, there are much better ways to use important taxpayer money to help people engage and get back into work and deal with challenges of addiction than this particular system. But as I recognize, if the government spends some money before we get to the next election, there's nothing I can do about that. But we will work with the community to roll it back and come up with better solutions, which actually help people who are down on their luck at the bottom of the cycle and lift them back up and get them back into work. Thanks, everybody. I'll see some of you tonight I hope.

DANIEL PARSELL, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FISHER: Good morning everyone. My name is Daniel Parsell - I am the local member - local candidate for Fisher, rather, and I am here with the Leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten, Deputy Leader, Tanya Plibersek and the member for Kingsford-Smith, Matt Thistlethwaite. This is a great opportunity for them to be here. They're here to support Queensland on their Bill bus tour and we thank them all for coming along. And I am here with Bill to announce a new policy - so I'll hand over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks, Daniel. Hello, everyone. We will keep this fairly brief because of course, you'd probably rather than be in water than just standing in front of it talking politics. But I am really pleased today with Tanya Plibersek and Matt Thistlethwaite to be announcing that if Labor is elected, we are going to invest $46 million dollars in the next three years to make sure that Australian children get a better chance to learn to swim and water safety. Chloe grew up on this coast on her the holidays. She learned to do her nippers and her training here, and she's no different to millions of other Australians. We love the beach, but gee it's important that we make sure that our kids learn to swim. It's a real tragedy that even this year alone in the summer, 65 people have drowned. Not just at the beaches, but on the rivers and in the dams. We need to be better and smarter at teaching people to swim. Anyone who's got a friend who's an adult who never learned to swim when they were a kid knows that they've missed out and those adults don't feel as confident around the water. As a parent, I want all my children to learn to swim and I've helped teach them to swim. I want to make sure that every Australian child at least has that opportunity. So we want to work with the states, we want to work with the surf lifesaving clubs to make sure that Aussie kids learn to swim, to make sure that they learn about water safety. We think this is a great investment in our kids. $46 million - it's a significant amount of money but it's not too much. We think that if Aussie kids can learn to swim in bigger numbers, then we think that's an investment in the future. It's an investment not only in their social confidence but indeed in their safety. So we're very positive about this announcement today. Happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

SHORTEN: Well, first of all you're quite right - Queensland and Annastacia Palaszczuk has done a good job in terms of rolling out a learn to swim campaign, and I acknowledge the work of the Courier Mail in campaigning on this. But it is too hit and miss in Australia. One in five Australian kids are finishing school with no knowledge of how to swim and that's not good enough. We want to work with state governments, we want to work with Catholic and independent schools, and we want to work with the surf lifesaving movement. But Matt Thistlethwaite and Tanya have done a fair bit of work on this policy, so why don't I get them to perhaps expand why we think this is filling a gap, making sure that Australian kids learn to swim. Matt?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY: Thanks, Bill. Firstly, I'd like to thank all of the stakeholders who helped us put this policy together. We've got representatives from Queensland Surf Lifesaving here today. We met in every state and territory across the country over the last 12 months, holding roundtables on this very important issue. And those stakeholders - including AUSTSWIM, including Royal Lifesaving, including Surf Lifesaving Australia - told us that the great lack in Australia at the moment is that we don't have a national approach to teaching swimming and water safety. And many kids are falling through the gaps. In fact, the swimming and water safety education that a child gets these days is unfortunately dependent on two things: where they live and their parents’ income. And in a nation like Australia, where being at the beach enjoying the water, is part of our culture and our national identity, it's simply not good enough that some children are missing out. And this announcement that we're making today of $46 million over the forward estimates will ensure that we can work with the state and territory governments to plug those gaps. And I do want to congratulate the Palaszczuk Government because historically in Queensland they haven't had aN across the board approach to swimming and water safety, but this government is now investing an additional $4 million in schools across the state to roll out a program, and our money will help supplement and boost that program to make sure that we get more kids into swimming and water safety, and they develop that very important and vital life skill.
JOURNALIST: How will that $46 million be divided up between the states?
THISTLETHWAITE: So the policy is based on costings that have been looked at by the Parliamentary Budget Office, the $46 million. It's based on a program of $55 per-student, which is roughly half the cost of what it takes to get a child through to a year four level of proficiency under the national swimming and water safety guidelines. And that policy will ensure that it's a matter of the Commonwealth partnering with the states to ensure that more kids get access to that vitally important training program, which is the competency benchmark that's been put forward by the national swimming and water safety council.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SHORTEN: Not at all. But if you want to talk about swimming, there's few places I can think better in Australia than coming to the Sunshine Coast. Now, we're doing our bus tour - our Jobs Not Cuts bus tour of Queensland. We've started in Logan - in Beenleigh, and I've been to Chermside, to the hospital there, and North Lakes shopping centre. During the weekend, I was very fortunate to be on the Sunshine Coast. My wife, Chloe, as I said, grew up on the Sunshine Coast in her holidays learning to swim. I have to say the water temperature in Queensland, it's unarguable. It's about seven degrees warmer than Bass Strait, where I was - down the Great Ocean Road where my little daughter did Nippers this summer. It's quite unusual for a Victorian to see people not all in wetsuits at the beach. So Queensland's a special place. But this program is something for all of Australia. Really, I think we can over complicate politics in Australia. I think you'd be hard put to find a single parent in Australia who doesn't think that making sure that kids getting swimming lessons isn't a good idea. You know, we're trying to do it in the most cost effective way, but I want Aussie kids to learn how to swim. A lot of good people are doing a lot of work. I want to acknowledge Laurie Lawrence's influence in terms of educating us about the importance of swimming lessons, Surf Lifesaving. But I think the Government nationally needs to step up.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)


SHORTEN: I heard the propeller, not much of what you said, sorry.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
SHORTEN: Well this is my 6th January as Opposition Leader. My united team's been working on policies. I think the old way of doing politics, where you rush out some expenditure promises just at the last minute in the official five weeks of an election campaign, I think that insults the intelligence of Australians. Wherever I travelled this summer, and the same has been even as late as this morning on the beaches here, people come up to me and they say, listen, we don't have to agree with everything that you say, but will you be stable? People are over this instability in politics where politicians fight amongst themselves and don't talk about the people. Now, jobs are important. Education, health care is important. Getting the banks to face a royal commission is important. But swimming lessons is just another piece of example of the work we're doing. So a good opposition puts out ideas all the time, so that's what we're doing today, because I think the Australian people should examine not just what we say about our opponents but what we want to do for the country. If what we do today can save the life of any Australian child or Australian adult, then this is a very good investment.
JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on Kelly O'Dwyer's resignation?
SHORTEN: First of all, I'm a dad. I know what it's like to be away from my three kids. Matt, as a father of four, Tanya's raised three kids along with her husband through 18 years of politics, so I understand the strains. But I also get that our Defence Force personnel are away at long periods of time from their families. In fact, millions of Australians, working families, have strains. So I respect her decision. I'm going to ask Tanya to supplement the answer to your question. But losing a cabinet minister, no matter what the reason, I think it's very legitimate in this case,  just heightens again, I think, the instability. And I wonder if there's going to be more people from the current government, for whatever good reason, just saying they've had enough and pulling the ripcord and getting off the government aeroplane. But I might get Tanya to talk about the policy issues.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thanks very much, Bill. I think you make a really important point when you say that millions of Australians are facing juggling the balance between work and family. There are people in all sorts of jobs and Bill's mentioned our defence personnel. You know, I go down to Garden Island when we're welcoming our Navy personnel back. They've often been on three or four or six month trips around the Gulf area perhaps, and they're coming home to tiny children, and dads coming home to their tiny children, waiting for them there on the wharf at Garden Island. It's tough to be away from your kids. We experience it as parliamentarians, but many professions experience this. And so the first thing I guess I'd say is of course I understand Kelly's decision. As Bill said, I've raised three children. My oldest is about to turn 18. All of them were born after I was elected to Parliament. I know that it is heartbreaking to miss out on some of those milestones. But we do it because we have a commitment to the country, to making this country a better country for our kids. We are always torn between those two things, of wanting to be there every minute for our children, and wanting to give them a better world, a better country to grow up in. So it is a struggle and I respect the decision that Kelly's made. What I would say is that the parliamentary environment has changed a lot in the time that I've been there. You know, we've got people like Bill, who've got a young family, like Matt who's got four beautiful children, who really want to be there for their kids as well. And having almost 50 per cent women in the Labor Caucus has made a huge difference to. Having active and engaged fathers and having more women has meant that we do try and respect people's desire to balance their work and family commitments but it's still hard as a parliamentarian. I remember Michelle Rowland in the last federal election - or the 2013 federal election campaign - doing railway stations every morning, kissing her six month old baby goodbye at 4.00am and walking out the door to do railway stations every morning. It's a tough life, and we do it because we want to leave a better country for our kids. I think one of the differences that the Liberal Party could make to make it easier to retain people like Kelly O'Dwyer in the frontbench is increase the number of women in their parliamentary party, because when you get a critical mass, it does change the culture. We started, in 1994, the Liberals and Labor started at around about 14 per cent female representation in both of our parties. The difference since then is we set targets to increase our female representation and we're at almost 50 per cent now, and the Liberals are stuck at about one in five of their parliamentary representatives being female. If you don't set targets, if you don't make it a priority, then nothing changes. And I don't think it's fair to put all the pressure on people like Kelly O'Dwyer to fix the problem. I'd like to see what Scott Morrison proposes to do to increase female representation in the Liberal Party.

JOURNALIST: Just while you're there and on female representation, what do you think the biggest barriers are to women entering and staying in politics?
PLIBERSEK: Well I think the biggest barrier is the willingness of a political organisation that they're part of to make room for them. I mean we had to have a fight in the Labor Party in 1994 to set our 30 per cent target for winnable seats. It was a fight, nobody gave us that target - the women and supportive men in the Labor Party fought for it and won it. And we achieved it. We achieved it ahead of schedule. We increased the target to 40 per cent. We've increased it to 50 per cent, and we'll get there six years ahead of schedule because our organisation, the Australian Labor Party, has made that a priority. I think the biggest barrier to women going into politics is the culture of the party that they've joined.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
SHORTEN: Well I just don't want to talk about politicians. I want to talk about parents, working parents right across Australia in a whole lot of occupations - the media right through to factories, right through to office work, right through the health and education systems. What will lessen the strain on families and women participating meaningfully at work, is pay women the same as men, provide well-funded childcare and also, change the culture. Tanya's right. The Labor Party - and we make no apology for it - we've decided that we want to be a party who's about 50-50 men and women in Parliament. We think we should reflect the Australian population. But it's not just about politicians. We're proposing to fund universal pre-school for all three and four year-olds. That's going to save families thousands of dollars. Very hard for a woman to return to work - say the father’s already at work and the woman's returning to work - if you're spending all the money you earn to return to work on childcare so you can go to work. It's a vicious cycle. So we want to fund childcare. It's a disaster in Australia that the cost of childcare under the Liberal Government's gone up 20 per cent. So do I think it's good if they replace Kelly O'Dwyer with another woman? Yes. But they sort of don't get that's the symptom, not the problem. The real problem for millions of Australian families, millions of Australian women is they're not paid the same as the blokes, childcare is ridiculously expensive and growing out of control. It's not just about one politician in the leafy suburbs of the south-eastern suburbs of Melbourne. It's about how do we make sure that women and men get a fair go. It's childcare, it's pay, it's the cost of living, and that's how I think we can help all women participate more fairly. But it's also the culture. It's making sure that when you create workplaces that you have women role models. That's why I am so lucky to have both Tanya Plibersek and Penny Wong in the leadership of the Labor Party. Queensland Labor's led by Annastacia Palaszczuk. I think that also sends a very healthy message to young girls: get involved.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of the news Barnaby Joyce is having another baby with Vicki Campion?

SHORTEN: I congratulate Barnaby and his family. That's entirely a personal matter for them. I congratulate them. Whenever a child is to be born, it's good news.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

SHORTEN: Listen, I wish them well. I'm not going to comment on that, and if anyone's out there complaining about Barnaby Joyce, it just sounds like more instability in the Coalition. I don't make any judgement about their personal circumstances. I don't think a lot of Australians do. But what we see, it doesn't matter where it is in the current government, they just don't like each other. They really need some time in opposition so they can get over themselves and get back to worrying about the Australian people. I mean, this week we had the former Minister for Pacific Islands, Concetta Fierravanti-Wells criticising her boss, the Liberal Prime Minister. We see this sort of backbiting about Barnaby Joyce. We see more and more Liberals, for whatever reason, jumping ship. This is a government who really, in my opinion, needs to hear the message of the electorate: time for stability. If you can't work amongst yourselves, how on earth can you govern the nation?

JOURNALIST: Do you think we will see Julie Bishop leave any time soon?
SHORTEN: Well Julie Bishop's a capable woman and I'm sure there's a lot she can do in the private sector. The fact that no West Australian Liberal MP voted for their most popular West Australian Liberal MP speaks volumes of the backbiting and the division. You know, it's up to her, but it wouldn't surprise me if she's got better things to do with her time than deal with a whole lot of people who don't appreciate her. Well, I for one am not going to blame her, but that's up to her.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
SHORTEN: Ms O'Dwyer has made it clear she's got her personal reasons for leaving and we respect that. We've had a good discussion at this press conference about the structural barriers, so I'm not going to try and extrapolate from her circumstances. The big point about her going is that she is the only Liberal woman, just about, in the Victorian Liberal Party in the House of Reps. They lost Julia Banks - a very capable woman who's now an independent. When Kelly O'Dwyer goes, it's quite likely they're just going to be blokes in the Liberal Party from Victoria. If you like, it's not her going which is the issue - that's her business. It's the fact that once she goes, what other women are they going to put on the frontbench? Is that good? We've covered everything? Thanks everybody, cheers.
BASIL ZEMPILAS, HOST: Every primary school student will have access to swimming lessons under a major policy announcement being made today by Labor. It follows a summer drowning toll which has shocked lifesavers around Australia, 65 deaths since the start of December. In the same period last summer, there'd been 44 drownings.

EDWINA BARTHOLOMEW, HOST: And Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten joins us now from Queensland's Sunshine Coast. Good morning to you, Mr Shorten. We've seen so many drownings at beaches and also inland waterways, it's important to note. So does your announcement today cover every child everywhere in Australia?

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Our aim is to make sure that every child in Australia gets the chance to learn swimming lessons. Now states are doing quite a bit already, but as you said in your preamble to this discussion, it has been a shocking toll this summer. I think one of the best things that as a nation we can give our children is confidence in the water, and that involves swimming lessons. So it is not the national government, if I get elected, taking over this - the state are doing it, but it is very patchwork. And isn't it great when kids learn to swim? This summer I took my youngest - our nine year-old, we went down to the Bass Strait, which is about seven degrees colder water than where I am up on the Sunshine Coast. But she did nippers, and it teaches them confidence in the water. I could not have been prouder. And I must say, this summer in particular has opened my eyes up to the work that the volunteers and surf lifesaving clubs do, giving kids water confidence. But I think it is time for the national government to use a modest amount of taxpayer money to make sure that every child can finish primary school, having had the chance to do swimming lessons. It is going to save lives. Also, as you might appreciate - you might have friends who are adults who don't swim. Kids who don't get the chance to learn to swim when they're young, it sort of punishes adults for a whole long time, so I think it is a good social measure as well.

ZEMPILAS: $46 million - let's hope it saves some lives, 65 deaths since the start of December, way too many. You're on a bus tour at moment, Mr Shorten, of south-east Queensland. The Prime Minister recently went on a bus tour. Are you going to finish your tour?

SHORTEN: Yes ours is a nine day tour, although because it overlapped with the weekend, I've had a day on the Sunshine Coast. I'm here at Moffat Beach - it's in the People's Republic of Caloundra. I know that Queenslanders are rightly proud of the Sunshine Coast, but having spent summer in Bass Strait where there are more wetsuits than bathers - listen, the temperature here is just stunning, and my wife comes from here so she's been at me for a long time -

BARTHOLOMEW: It certainly is a lovely spot.

SHORTEN: So I've had a day off the bus and I'll go back on the bus on Monday.

BARTHOLOMEW: The Prime Minister is also in Queensland at the moment. It seems like Queenslanders will be the big beneficiaries of election campaign cash-splash, and also be used for a lot of photo opportunities over the coming months it seems, Mr Shorten. Tell us, what electorates are you really targeting there, because you do have a good chance of winning some of these marginal seats that you're travelling through over the next 16 towns that you will be visiting.

SHORTEN: Well this is my sixth January as Opposition Leader and what I'm hearing all over Australia, not just Queensland, is people are sick of the instability. So when you say what am I targeting, I don't look at Queensland as LNP or Labor, I just look at them as Queenslanders. I want to make sure that kids get a good education and well-funded schools, that when you're sick you can afford to see the doctor, that the pensioners get a better deal, that there are jobs in regional Queensland. So our policies are aimed at all Australians, and I think people are just looking for stability. Do you know that over summer, one of the comments I got from people who say they are die-hard Liberals, they just want one person to be Prime Minister for the next three years. So stability is the big message I'm getting, and I can offer that after six years as Opposition Leader.

ZEMPILAS: Clive Palmer has been copping some criticism for sending out mass text messages. Will the ALP be doing that in the lead up to the next election?

SHORTEN: Well, I think that part of the reason why Clive Palmer is copping some criticism is that he used to run a nickel plant or business interest associated with it in Townsville. And that nickel plant went into insolvency and workers were left with unpaid wages and entitlements - the taxpayers had to step into the shoes of Palmer and pay the workers their entitlements. So I think what's annoying people, other than the electronic spam nature of these communications, is that it would appear a lot of people think that Mr Palmer owes his workers tens of millions of dollars, and the taxpayers - and they say, if you have got enough money to put your billboards up or annoy me with your unwarranted text messages, how about you just repay the taxpayer first? And I think once he does that people might take him more seriously.

BARTHOLOMEW: So that's a promise not to spam our phones during the election is it, Mr Shorten? No messages from Bill?

SHORTEN: We will only ever give you facts - important facts.

BARTHOLOMEW: I think that might be the likelihood of receiving one.

SHORTEN: But I tell you one thing Edwina, I'll tell you one thing we won't do: we won't be spending as a company director, money chasing votes when they need to go to repay the taxpayers and the workers what they are owed to begin with. It's about priorities.

ZEMPILAS: I say this with respect this morning, Mr Shorten, back on the bus. Thanks for making the announcement with us this morning about the school swimming program.

SHORTEN: Have a lovely morning guys. The swimming program is really important, it's good policy.

BARTHOLOMEW: It certainly is. 1,600ks to cover so he has got a long way to go.

ANIKA WELLS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LILLEY: Welcome everybody it's great to see you all here in the electorate of Lilley. It is my honour to welcome the Bill Bus to the seat, for the Queensland Jobs Not Cuts Tour, today stopping at Prince Charles Hopsital. I have Ali France, our Labor Candidate for Dickson with me, obviously our Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, our Shadow Minister for Health, Catherine King and Wayne Swan, the current Member for Lilley. Today's announcement is a very welcome one for northside families. The Prince Charles perhaps is best known throughout the entire of the great southeast as the people who sell the strawberry sundaes at the Ekka each year and that money raises funds for much needed medical research which helps to try and tackle some of Australia's most debilitating chronic conditions. So, we locals love our hospital here and while we prefer to love it from afar, the truth is that we never know when our time will come to be driven up that hill and in the front doors. So my family knows that path well, I was hospitalised several times after the birth of my daughter. So for what it's worth, ward 2B has a very refreshing view over the pergola. But I was lucky, because I was able to be assessed very quickly and my out of pocket costs were the medicines I needed to take home with me. People who need an MRI scan often aren't that lucky, so today's announcement is a very welcome one because it will help reduce operating costs, offer more scans and reduce wait list times. So northside families are looking to their Government to try and make things a little bit easier, reducing the costs and wait on MRI scans help make something very important just a little bit easier so I'll hand over to our Opposition Leader Bill Shorten to tell you more.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Anika and good morning everybody. It's great to be at the Prince Charles Hospital on Brisbane's northside. It's day two of my Jobs Not Cuts Bus Tour of Queensland and we're here today talking about an issue which may not be the only issue for this election but for the Labor Party, there is no more important issue, health care for Australians, affordable healthcare for Australians, quality healthcare for Australians. And we over-complicate politics sometimes and there's no doubt in my mind as I enter my sixth January as Opposition Leader, that healthcare is a number one issue for Australians. And at this hospital, it's quite an amazing world-class facility. Wayne Swan, the outgoing Member for Lilley was explaining to me that this is an iconic hospital, it has a world-class heart facility. And it is a hospital which gives the community peace of mind, it's part of the massive growth of the northside of Brisbane, but it's a hospital which now needs new investment. New investment in providing access to the best technology and ensuring that healthcare is affordable. Today I'm really pleased to announce that we will provide a fully rebateable Medicare licence for an MRI machine at this hospital. What that effectively means is that Australians and that people living on the northside who need MRI services, diagnostic services, are able to get the imaging here and not have the out of pocket costs they currently experience. Out of pocket costs could be $400 or $500 and in some cases up to $900. We don't want to go down the American path where how much money you have determines the quality of your healthcare. Instead Labor wants to make choices. We make a choice to properly fund our health system in Australia. We make a choice that in growing communities such as the very fast and large growing northside of Brisbane, they should have access to affordable medical technology. MRI technology is now a fundamental tool for so much of what doctors do when they treat Australians who are ill. So this is a good announcement. We're able to afford to extend our Medicare rebateable licences to MRI machines all around Australia in areas of great need because we've made tough choices. For us, politics is about better hospitals not bigger profits for banks and that's what we're going to do today. I'd now like to invite Catherine King our Shadow Health Minister to talk further about why this is good news and important news for people who live in the northside of Brisbane.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, Bill it's lovely to be here with Anika and with Ali, our fantastic candidates for the north here. This announcement today is an important one for Prince Charles Hospital. As Wayne Swan has explained to me, this hospital has really grown as the population and community has grown. It's known widely across Queensland for its great work with heart functions but of course now it is the general hospital for this area. And as that has occurred, the MRI licences here, the partial MRI licences that are here are no longer adequate to serve the population of this area. This announcement today means that for general patients and for outpatients in particular that it will make MRIs affordable for this community. MRIs are a very common diagnostic tool and under the Liberal Party, we have seen very little action when it comes to MRIs. When Labor was last in Government, we funded over 200 MRI licences during our term in Government. This Government has been very late to the party and I'm very proud that they have now followed our lead but unfortunately have not announced any MRIs for this hospital here so this announcement will make a substantial difference. Labor's investment in MRI of course also comes on the back of this Liberal Government's cuts to this hospital, over $7 million over the last three years alone, cuts to this hospital. And that has an impact. It has an impact on the hospital's capacity to see people in the emergency department to take outpatient visits. Labor wants to invest in our hospitals, we want to see MRIs, diagnostic imaging more affordable for people but we don't want to see anymore Liberal cuts.

SHORTEN: Thanks very much, Catherine. Are there any questions on this or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: Just in regards to the Aged Care Royal Commission, do you think that this Royal Commission is perhaps more worthy than other ones we've seen that may have been more politically driven?

SHORTEN: I think that in Australia, that people who require aged care support have not been getting a good deal for a number of years. So I'm a supporter of this Royal Commission, in fact, when I raised the possibility of having the Royal Commission and discussion on a political talkshow and talking in one of my town hall meetings, the current Government and the current minister rushed out and they said that because I was contemplating a Royal Commission into aged care, the current Government and current minister accused me of elder abuse. I in turn said they're covering up. So I think this Royal Commission is the right decision. But you don't need a Royal Commission to know that when you cut $1.2 billion out of aged care, you're going to create potential time bombs and disasters. You don't need a Royal Commission to know that under the last five years of Liberal administration in Australia, aged care has gone backwards. I might invite Catherine King to talk a bit further about aged care and also some of the issues why this current Government just really has dropped the ball on Australia's older people in the last five years.

KING: We certainly support the Royal Commission and obviously it has got its first day of hearings today and Julie Collins, the Shadow Minister for Aged Care I think will be doing a stand up and talking about some of the news that has hit the media today. But what we've seen over the last five years is $1.2 billion cut out of the aged care system and one of the most, I think dangerous and ridiculous decisions that the Government made, was to cut the dementia supplement. That dementia supplement went to directly to every single residential aged care to actually help them work with patients with dementia who do have more complex needs. The Government is announcing today that it's going to crack down on physical and chemical restraint, that's a good thing. But they have known for five years that this is a substantial issue in our aged care facilities. They have known that aged care facilities, managing dementia patients is increasingly challenging as we see more and more people being diagnosed with dementia. Frankly, what we are going to hear from this Royal Commission are going to be some very harrowing stories. But what we actually need is not cuts to services, we actually need to put resources into residential aged care so we're actually looking after the people who are most vulnerable in their later years.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Catherine.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Clive Palmer has promised to outspend Labor and the Liberals. How many seats do you think he can take?

SHORTEN: First of all I'd just ask Mr Palmer to pay the workers what he owes them and pay the taxpayers what he owes them. Once he's done that I am happy to take questions on Clive Palmer. In terms of the election, it's a tough election, Labor has only won from Opposition nationally three times since the second World War. But, I think we've got a couple of advantages, we are united, we have been doing the policy work and we know that the economy is not working in the interests of every day Australians so we've got a Fair Go Plan which I'll be talking to Queenslanders about. This summer wherever I travelled, people would say to meeverything is going up Bill, except our wages. So what we need is a Fair Go Plan which looks after working and middleclass Queenslanders and working and middleclass Australians. Only Labor has got tax refunds for working and middleclass people in the order of nearly $1,000 each person each year, for each person earning up to $90,000 a year. Only Labor has got a plan to help keep the cost of private health insurance down. Only Labor has got a plan for renewable energy which will lead to lower power bills for Australians. So it's going to be a tough election but we've got a united team, I've got a more talented team, look at my remarkable candidates on the northside for example, Anika and Ali, they're strong candidate. So we've got a good team, we're united, our policies I think are talking to what's really happening out there in the community. I really would prefer to be announcing MRI licences so that people can see their out of pocket costs reduced for basic healthcare in this country rather than defending giving tax concessions and tax loopholes to the top end of town.

JOURNALIST: Is the Fijian Prime Minister right to criticise Australia on climate policy?

SHORTEN: Yeah that was quite remarkable wasn't it. Listen, when Mr Morrison goes overseas he represents Australia so I want him to do well. But it's a bit embarrassing that he had to go to Fiji to be told that he's doing nothing on climate change, when in fact millions of Australians could have told him that in Australia. We have no climate change policy. I mean, the Fijians have got YouTube and the internet, and they've just looked up the pictures of Mr Morrison brandishing coal like some lucky charm in Parliament in Question Time, turning it into show-and-tell time for primary school students. Like, we've got a Prime Minister who thinks that a lump of coal is an energy plan. Coal is part of our energy mix going forward, of course it is. But the rest of the world, millions of Australians, I, Labor, know that the current Government are not interested in climate change. They can't even agree if it's caused by human activity or not. So, Mr Morrison didn't need to buy an airplane ticket to go to Fiji to be told, but the whole world and Australia knows that the Liberal Government have got no climate change policy.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you to clarify something we discussed yesterday. The sequencing on the measures, in your first term of government, would be referendum on constitutional recognition, then plebiscite on the Republic?

SHORTEN:  Yes.

JOURNALIST: Derryn Hinch has used a social media platform to tweet out details of a case that the police wanted to keep quiet. Do you condemn that?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I want to go to the tragedy and the crime which has happened, which has triggered the question you're asking. A young Israeli woman in Australia savagely and brutally murdered. I'm a parent. I've got teenage children who, you know, use the public transport in Melbourne. This is not the Australia or the Melbourne that I grew up in. It is shocking. I want to say to parents whose young people come to Australia, this is shocking but this is not Australia. So, my feelings for the grief of this family, are just very strong. I want to reassure them that our police are amongst the best in the world. They will successfully catch, and our legal system will punish the wrongdoer. That is what I also want to say to people coming to Australia, and I want to say to parents in Australia; I do think that people who are in positions of power and influence shouldn't put out information automatically when the police have got a different strategy to catch and convict the wrongdoers. I don't want to give what Senator Hinch has done any more oxygen than that. For me, this is about a shocking and senseless murder. For me, it's about the loss of a family. And the idea that your child could be lost on the other side of the world makes them particularly powerless. But I do want to assure people that our police are as good as anywhere in the world, and I, for one, am a politician who will let the police do their job and not get in the way.

JOURNALIST: How do you respond to the claim your speeches have been anti-business and class warfare?

SHORTEN: Who's claiming that? It's just rubbish. Oh, do you mean -

JOURNALIST: There is an article today suggesting that your speeches have been anti-business (inaudible) so what’s your response to that?

SHORTEN: There's a serious issue, but I do have a sense of humour too. Some days, when I watch some of the conservative business papers condemn me, the only thing different in the newspaper is the date at the top of the newspaper banner really. I don't take that too seriously. The real issue which we're talking about is that I am outraged that we're going to have no Australian ships left on the Australian coastline. You know, I do think that, as an island nation, Australian companies should be using their product on Australian shores when they ship it, in Australian ships, or at least crewed by Australian crews. Iron boats have been covering materials in the steel and iron industry, sending it around our coastline for a hundred years. I'm a student of history. This is a convenient fact which corporate Australia love to forget now, but nearly 270 ships were sunk off the Australian coastline in the Second World War. At the start of the Second World War, because we had privatised our shipping industries and sold it all off, we didn't have enough Australian ships to carry our troops to the Middle East, or to carry supplies to Australia. We didn't have enough seafarers, ships' engineers and the like. History always repeats. And what we have here is amnesia from corporate Australia, who thinks that the almighty dollar is the only thing that matters. Have a look at ecological disasters caused by ships of shame. That is ships registered in third world countries or in tax havens. Why does corporate Australia, the big end of town think that the next quarter's profits are more important than our environment, more important than Australian jobs, and more important than Australian national security? If we form a government, I make this pledge to Australia: we are determined to get more ships registered in Australia and more Australian seafarers working along the Australian coastline. For me, this is not a matter of class-war. It's a matter of being an independent nation, controlling our transport costs, making sure that we protect our environment, and making sure that as an island nation we have ships. You know, in the good times, maybe it doesn't matter to corporate Australia. But in the bad times, we'll wish we had more Aussie seafarers.

JOURNALIST: Has Labor come any closer to establishing the timing its negative gearing policy?

SHORTEN: We will do it after the election in consultation, the Shadow Treasurer will have more to say about it. One important point about the timing of our negative gearing policy is this - it's not retrospective. In other words, if you've invested under the current tax laws, the current tax laws will stay in place for your investment. I periodically see some of the hysterical commentary from the Government. You know, they're trying to blame us for poor housing prices now. They're the Government, we're not. Our policy is not in, their policies are in and housing prices have been crashing. But what we must make very clear is that, if you've invested under the current tax laws, they're the rules that will apply going forward. Our changes to negative gearing are prospective - the other point I want to make is not so much a timing point but it's just a matter of fact. To me, running a government in Australia is about choices. I would rather find the money to pay for healthcare in this country than to give a tax windfall to a property investor purchasing their seventh house. It's really a question of fairness. And of course the other point about fairness is do we want to be a nation who has the best tax loopholes in the world, or has the best hospitals in the world? Do we want to be a nation which allows a property investor to get a tax payment for their tenth investment property or make sure that a young person can get a job in Queensland. Do we want to be a nation who says to first home buyers, "we won't help you, but if you've got several million dollars and you want to buy your fifth house, we're your friends." Mr Morrison and his Government are the friends of the top end of town, the tax loopholes, the friends of the multinationals, they're the friends of the people who can opt out of the tax system. We just want to see everyone get a fair go.

JOURNALIST: Aren't you worried that given the soft housing market, the removal of this and not just the up-front effect but obviously the ongoing effects that it could reduce house prices and so on could have a very bad effect on the Australian housing market and economy?

SHORTEN: No, it won't. Let's be clear about that. Ours is a fairness measure. I haven't heard anyone explain to me how it is fair that a property investor can get their taxpayers to subsidise that person for their seventh house, but a first home buyer, well, they get no help at all. That's just not fair. But if you want to look at what's affecting house prices now, why can't the Government be honest with the Australian people? It's because the banks aren't lending as much money. The banks are not lending as much money - that's what's causing the issue. Now, the regulators have put in place policies which are discouraging the banks from lending money. Who do the regulators report to? They report to the current Government. The current Government is pulling a sort of pea and thimble trick, where they want you to look over here at Labor's future policies so as to take your attention from the fact that under the current Government this economy is not working properly. It's not just in housing; childcare costs have gone up 20 per cent under this Government. Speak to any parents who are out there buying the books and uniforms and equipment for their kids returning to school, the costs have gone up. If you want to see how this economy is not working properly speak to 10 million Australians who have barely had a wage rise in the last couple of years. This economy is dangerously weighted or not appropriately weighted in the interests of everyday people. If you make several billion dollars in Australia, you don't pay as much tax, you can opt out of the system. If you're a multinational, you don't pay tax here. This economy is not working in the interests of everyday Australians. What we're doing is making serious economic reforms which will allow us to properly fund the best education system in the world, the best healthcare system in the world, and the best aged care system in the world, and will allow us to make sure that we get wages moving again in this country by, for example, restoring penalty rates, which have been arbitrarily cut.

JOURNALIST: Realistically, though, given the election timing  if you did win, you wouldn't be looking to introduce that until 2021 then given your consultation period?

SHORTEN: I'll talk with our Shadow Treasurer and we'll have more to say about that. Whatever changes we introduce will be the result of consultation, and they will be prospective.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, sorry there was a story yesterday about Animals Australia offering a monetary rewards for footage of animal cruelty. What do you think about these methods of obtaining video footage?

SHORTEN: Well as I understand the media occasionally pay for stories, it’s not my role to always judge how information gets out there. For me what worries me is the images we see. Covering up cruelty to animals doesn’t make cruelty to animals less cruel.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) on climate change what do we risk with our relationship in the Pacific?

SHORTEN: Well they are not going to take us seriously. I imagine the Pacific is very grateful for conservative politicians coming over and giving them lectures about doing nothing on climate change and then saying we want to be your friend. It’s pretty embarrassing really isn’t it? The Prime Minister of Australia who has sneered at climate change policies, whose government got rid of a Prime Minister who wanted to take baby steps on climate change , flies over Fiji and gets a lecture about not doing enough on climate change. It’s not just the rest of the world not taking us seriously on climate  change, the Australian people are fed up. Do you know 2 million Australian households put solar on their roofs, yet they’ve got a government in Canberra that’s so far behind them, it means their energy prices keep going up because of the lack of policy certainty. Labor’s got a climate change and energy policy. We’re interested in reviving the Government’s national energy guarantee, we think that was the basic framework – we didn’t like everything about it but we were prepared to work with it because we need bipartisanship in energy policy. The current Treasurer was the architect of the national energy guarantee, and he’s given up on it. This Government can’t take action on climate change, because if they do the right-wing of their party will get rid of anyone who does. So if you want real action on climate change and lower power prices vote Labor at the next election.

JOURNALIST: Just on recognition, so we’re clear. Because there will be a first term plebiscite on the republic and the referendum on recognition would come before that, that’s a first term referendum on recognition?

SHORTEN: Yes. My answer hasn’t changed.

JOURNALIST: Would Labor consider funding the Independent Public Schools Program in Queensland after the Federal Government pulled funding in 2017?

SHORTEN: I’m not familiar with which particular program that is, if you’re referring to specific policy I’ll follow up. But our general approach to education is this, I want to give our kids the best education system in the world. We will fund schools according to need. The vast bulk of that means that government schools get funding, but we will also fund non-government schools according to need. What we won’t do is cut education funding like this current government. The other point I make about education which is good news for all Queenslanders, especially people looking at childcare this year and the costs of that – is that Labor is going to roll-out in our first term, universal preschool for 3 and 4 year-olds. If we give those kids those two years of structured learning, that just means that exponentially when they go primary school and secondary school, they’re going to do so much better. Labor is the party of education. Now if you excuse me I’ve got a bus to catch on my Jobs Not Cuts tour. Thank you very much.

DES HARDMAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FORDE: Alright, thanks for being here today everybody. My name is Des Hardman, I'm your Labor candidate for the Federal seat of Forde at the next federal election. I'm also a radiographer and I work here at Logan Hospital. I'm a local dad and I live right here in Meadowbrook, here where the Logan hospital is. We've got some really exciting news to talk to people here at the hospital today about, the staff, the patients, everybody here at Logan hospital will benefit from this, and most of all our community. So with me today, I'd like to welcome Bill Shorten, Leader of the Opposition.  Bill has come to Queensland today to launch our campaign, our Queensland campaign to make this announcement, this very important announcement. We've also got Catherine King, Catherine is our Shadow Health Minister and very local Member for Rankin, Jim Chalmers and Shadow Minister for Finance. So, today we have announced an Urgent Care Clinic a $33 million investment in healthcare, public healthcare, services for people in our community. For people like me who knows that our hospital is at 100 per cent capacity every single day that this type of investment will provide the relief of the pressure of services. And that is a significant move. And only a Labor Government will make those types of investments in their local community when it comes to healthcare. So once again, here I am today, I'm proud, I'm excited, I'm really looking forward to having the opportunity to ensure that this commitment that we're making today becomes reality after the next election as soon as we can possibly make it happen. So thank you all very much for being here and I'll hand you over to Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Des and happy new year to the Queensland media. It's great to be back in Brisbane, it's great to be back in Queensland with Des Hardman, our Candidate for Forde. I'm here of course with Jim Chalmers the local Member for Rankin and a senior member of my shadow ministry and Catherine King, our Shadow Health Minister from whom you will hear in a moment. For the next nine days, I'm making Queensland the headquarters of the Opposition. I'm going to get back on the Bill Bus and I'm going to travel to many parts of Queensland. And we're going to carry a message here as the summer break comes to an end. Our message to Queenslanders is that we want to see more jobs and less cuts. We're going to see here today as part of our ongoing commitment to reversing cuts to Queensland hospitals from the Federal Government. Logan Hospital is a very, very hardworking hospital. I just spoke to a family whose father was treated in palliative care here, they couldn't have been more complimentary at one of the hardest times in their life than they could have, about the staff here at the hospital. And we've just been to the outpatients area where you see it's busier than Flinders Street Railway Station in Melbourne, this outpatient centre. So Labor is really pleased because of the economic decisions that we've made, the reform decisions we've made, that we're going to prioritise better healthcare for Queenslanders over bigger tax loopholes for multinationals. Specifically here at Logan hospital, following the lobbying of Des Hardman who works here at the hospital in radiography, what we are going to do is we are going to invest $33.4 million in an Urgent Care Clinic. What we see in this hospital is a very crowded outpatients, you've got fractures, you've got people who have injured themselves at home, the kids on the skateboards. You see, people with painful injuries in a very crowded facility. So we're going to build an outpatients centre which will deal with urgent care and that's going to make a big difference to the ability of Logan Hospital to deliver healthcare and it's going to make a big difference to the health outcomes to the people who live in this fast growing part of Brisbane's southern corridor. We're going to do this because we see the next election as being about choices. We're choosing better healthcare and hospitals over bigger tax concessions for the top end of town. We think that this is what Australians want. I'll be travelling throughout Queensland to talk about our plan for better jobs rather than more cuts. And what we'll be doing is be it in North Queensland, Central Queensland or South East Queensland, we'll be taking our positive plan to the people of Queensland. And we start in Queensland and of course we will travel throughout the rest of Australia. The election will have to be in the first part of this year. We want to put positive plans. The two overwhelming sentiments I heard this summer from people is one, they think the Government is a shambles, they think it's divided. And two, they're concerned that everything is going up except their wages. What we're going to do is put people back at the centre of political decision making in this country and our announcement today at Logan Hospital shows our ongoing commitment to delivering quality healthcare for all Australians regardless of where they live. I'd like to invite my colleague Catherine King to talk further about our commitment to healthcare and to the Logan Hospital and then happy to take questions.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks Bill, look it's terrific to be here with Des Hardman our terrific candidate and Jim Chalmers, the local member in this area as well, to make this announcement to take pressure off Logan Hospital. We've seen $6.1 million over the current hospital agreement with the states and the Commonwealth ripped out of Logan Hospital. And that has an impact. It has an impact on the number of outpatient visits that can be had. It has an impact on the number of people who can be seen in the emergency department here. We know this hospital is under pressure. The staff here are doing a fantastic job, but we want to take some of that pressure off. We've had a fantastic announcement by the state government, a $280 million redevelopment of this hospital, but that's going to take time. So to take the pressure off, the announcement today of a $33 million urgent care clinic that's come at the behest of the Queensland Government and Des Hardman's hard work in lobbying for it. This urgent care clinic will treat Category four and five patients. Patients who might have a minor fracture, a scrape, a cut that needs tending to, might have some upper respiratory tract issues, people who really should not be treated, not necessarily in the emergency department because they are not admitted to the hospital, but do need that extra level of care beyond what can be done with a general practice. So this urgent care clinic will take pressure off Logan Hospital, but also make sure there can be a better integrated primary healthcare system here in Logan to really make sure that staff at this acute hospital can continue to do the terrific work that they are. I want to thank particularly Des for his fantastic advocacy for the people of Logan.

SHORTEN: Great. Thanks, Catherine. Are there any questions on this or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: Is this the start of the election campaign for you?

SHORTEN: I think a conscientious opposition should always be working on the best policy ideas. I mean we have come back from leave,  certainly I have chosen to start my campaigning in Queensland. I did in 2016, where goes Queensland, goes the nation. We're picking issues that we think are most important to Australians. Labor at the next election is choosing the healthcare of Australians over bigger profits for multinationals and banks. So today certainly reflects our values and our priorities. Wherever you live in Queensland, wherever you live in Australia, it should be your Medicare card which determines the quality of healthcare you get, not how much money you've got in the bank and it's part of our commitment to make communities like Logan even more liveable.

JOURNALIST: If the Logan Hospital is at 100 per cent capacity every day, does that mean the Palaszczuk Government is doing a bad job?

SHORTEN: It just means that population is growing and infrastructure has got to keep pace. The fact of the matter is, be it back in the day when Campbell Newman was in charge cutting healthcare in Queensland, or the $6 million of cuts which the current LNP Government in Canberra has presided over the hospital, you have got to increase medical services over time. The population is growing and we're getting better at how we deliver healthcare. This is a good workforce so I invite you to take the time to talk to the people who work here, right from the executive management, through to the nurses, through to the volunteers who greet you when you first come to the hospital. But we can't ask more of our people without the government in Canberra investing in the health system in Australia. Politics is all about choices. We choose the health of Australians over keeping multinationals and the big end of the town happy and we can do this because we’ve made hard economic decisions and we're putting our policies forward.

JOURNALIST: The Saturday that you’re taking off on the Sunshine Coast, will taxpayers’ money be going towards that?

SHORTEN: No. And listen, I notice that some people in the Government are critical of me doing nine days up here in Queensland and taking Saturday off to be with my family. Do you know rather than bagging me being in Queensland, why don't they come and visit? Come and have a holiday in Queensland if that’s what you want to do or come and work in Queensland. For the next nine days, the headquarters for me is Queensland. I mean everyone here knows that my wife's a Queenslander so I love coming up here but it's a work thing and we're going to make sure over the next nine days we visit much of Queensland and I'm looking forward on Saturday to catching up with my family.

JOURNALIST: You promised to smash under-performing super funds, how?

SHORTEN: Pardon?

JOURNALIST: You promised to go after the under-performing super funds, how?

SHORTEN: I think the regulator, first of all, superannuation is not the money of the super funds, or indeed of governments. It's the people's money, which is put into accounts to be invested in their best interest. Now what happens is there's been a lot of debate about the performance of banks, and I for one will never forget that Scott Morrison voted 26 times against having a banking royal commission. And one of the spotlights which has been shone in recent days is making sure that where people's money is in superannuation funds, that those superannuation funds are not complacent or lazy, that they are actually working hard to get the best investment return. I for one certainly think the regulators need to examine the bottom quarter of underperforming funds and make sure their trustees are doing their job, otherwise you’ve got to move those mandates on from those trustees, or replace those trustees. So I think that one year doesn't necessarily signal how a performance will be, but if you have a pattern of under-performance over half a decade or more, then I do think the regulators need to step in and demand greater accountability.

JOURNALIST: Will Labor be supporting a royal commission into what happened in the Murray-Darling Basin given that we’ve got reports of another fish kill today?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, there's an ecological disaster unfolding on Australia's greatest river system. The government can't keep ignoring the problem or just brushing off the concerns. South Australian Premier Jay Weatherill, when he was in, started a Royal Commission from South Australia's view. Of course the conservative governments elsewhere wouldn't have a bar of that and now we've got an ecological disaster. It may well be timely to wait for the South Australian Royal Commission to report to help us to understand what the next steps should be. I’ve asked the current Prime Minister, as we're so close to an election, would he work with the Opposition and more importantly Australia's scientists and experts to provide a report and an update on what they think is happening, the best experts think is happening, before Parliament resumes on February the 12th. Sadly the current government has seen fit to schedule only 10 days of Parliament in eight months. This ecological disaster should be a priority for the government - it is for me - before we get to a decision of a national Royal Commission, I'd like to see what the South Australian information is, and I certainly want to know what the experts' best advice is about what it happening, because it is a complex issue, before Parliament resumes. I commend my Shadow Minister, Tony Burke, I sent him up to Menindee, which is ground zero for some of these ecological disasters and we’re already getting information back from that visit.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) said last week that they were very well staffed…

SHORTEN: What I'm talking about is outpatients. I don't know if you came through the tour we just did, but it's very crowded. They're getting up to 80 people there at a time. What I might do is invite Catherine to talk further about the need which we are addressing. I guarantee you though, if we go out and hold a view of the people who live in Logan, they want to see more outpatient services for the sort of care we're proposing. And if we were to have a beauty parade between Mr Morrison's tax cuts for the big end of town, or my plan to provide more outpatient services in Logan, you put your money on us.

KING: Thanks, Bill. The hospital is currently seeing 500 people a day through the emergency department and that's been growing by 3% each year. Of course, Labor when we were last in government invested substantially in an expansion of the emergency department and thank goodness we did make that investment, because there was huge pressure on this hospital and that continues. Outpatients as well, there are obviously substantial waiting time for outpatient visits. What the urgent care clinic will do for patients, it will provide 22 new specialty clinics so other outpatient visits can be held at the urgent care clinic. So that will really take pressure off the outpatients department here, and as I said those Category 4 and 5 patients that are not going to be admitted, that will take pressure off the ED department, so they can get on with doing what this hospital is good at; treating those people who are in acute episodes of illness and making sure they then can move on to what their next transition of care will be.

JOURNALIST: Are patients being stacked in the corridors here?

KING: Well certainly this hospital, there is no doubt is under pressure because of population growth, and we also know that the cuts that have happened here at this hospital mean that of course if you cut funding out of the hospital, it means you can deliver less services. That's what the Morrison Government has done under the current funding agreement, $6.1 million cut out of this hospital. You don't improve outpatient waiting times, you don't improve emergency department waiting times, you don't improve quality of care and services by cutting $6.1 million out of hospital. What you do is you do what the State Government has done, invest $280 million in redeveloping the hospital, and what federal Labor wants to do, try and take immediate pressure off by the building of an urgent care clinic.

JOURNALIST:  inaudible?

SHORTEN: First of all, when I look at Queensland I don’t look at just Labor and Liberal seats, I look at Queenslanders. I think our message of a fair go for all, providing bigger tax cuts for working people, properly funding our hospitals and schools, taking real action on climate change and renewable energy, which will help with cost of living. Getting wages moving again in this country, making sure that wherever you live in this country you’ve got access to decent services not cuts, that’s a Queensland story. So our message I think is one for the times in Queensland. But having said that there are thirty seats here and we want to make sure that we do well here. If you want to form a majority in the house of reps you certainly need to get a good showing in Queensland. I’ve been coming to Queensland for the various jobs I’ve been in for a long time. A lot of my family now live here, this is a great place to live but I think what a lot of Australians feel, not just Queenslanders, is that in the last few years something is not going right in the economy. More and more Australian families are having to spend household savings just to pay the weekly bills and wages growth is at record lows. We are seeing the cost of childcare up 20% since the Coalition came in. We are seeing the cost of private health insurance nearly making it a luxury product. We’ve seen the freeze on the Medicare rebate. So I think that not only is Queensland important electorally, what’s happening is that the government in Canberra has forgotten the people of Australia. This summer when I went around and people would come up and talk to me, the most common thing that they would say to me would be listen we are just sick of the instability. So yeah, we are putting a positive plan – what people say is stop focusing on yourself and your own fights and focus on us. What could be more reasonable to focusing on the needs of people than if you have an injury at home or if your child falls of something or you need urgent care which is non-life threatening. Let’s go and make life easier for the health workforce of this state and put some extra resources in rather than tax concessions for the top end of town.

JOURNALIST: How many seats do you think you can win? Be realistic.

SHORTEN: I am always realistic. I want to win as many as we can but that is going to be up to the voters at the end of the day.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a projection?

SHORTEN: Well I am not so arrogant as to say to the voters as to what they are going to do. We will find out whenever the election is. But two things I already know what voters think. One – they would like to see one prime minister for three years. Labor’s learnt the lesson. There’s that old joke but its actually true now. Once upon a time paramedics would ask someone who is suspected of concussion ‘who is the prime minister?’ because we were pretty stable but now they don’t bother. So people are sick of the instability. I have had life-long liberal voters say they don’t agree with everything we are saying, but that is fair enough, who agrees with everything someone says, but they are sick of the instability. This is my sixth January as Opposition Leader, I’ve got a very good team, we are stable and we are working on policies. But the other thing they say to me is Bill, once upon a time having rich parents was useful but it wasn’t a prerequisite to the next generation getting ahead. Now what’s happening is that money is determining the future much more and we are not seeing the proper resources for the pensioners, we are not seeing the proper support for the battlers and we are not seeing the wages moving at all, we're seeing labour hire expanding everywhere, one in three Australians is in casual or insecure work. People feel that the economy is headed in the wrong direction because it is not working in the interests of everyone. That why our fair go plan for Queensland and for Australia, I'm optimistic it will resonate. We’ve just got to tell the story that’s why I'm going on the bus. Our bus is going to travel at least 1400km.

JOURNALIST: How often will you be on it?

SHORTEN: I will be on the bus every day where the bus is going. I won't be catching an aeroplane between now and towards the very end of next week. You’re welcome to come on the bus but I will certainly be there, travelling to big towns and small towns. I think that Australians also want to see their politicians being real, and being out there with them. They don't expect us to solve every problem they've got. But they do expect that you're in touch. I think this government has seriously lost touch. When they say everything is going fine in Australia, speak to someone who is waiting for a shift by text message the night before they're due to work. Speak to someone who can't get an apprenticeship for their child, speak to a seafarer who’s just lost a job because BHP is sending the ship overseas and foreign flagging it. Speak to a railway worker in Rockhampton, speak to someone in Maryborough who is trying to battle to make sure we can keep manufacturing there. This government is out of touch and I want to help resume and renew the faith of people that their vote can make a difference.

JOURNALIST: You didn’t get the swing you were looking for last time what makes you think you will this time?

SHORTEN: Oh no, the Longman by-election was very satisfactory.

JOURNALIST: I mean in 2016 election.

SHORTEN: Oh you mean, back then? Listen, we did OK. People thought they were voting for Malcolm Turnbull. He had just got rid of Tony Abbott. Remember Malcolm Turnbull the Liberal leader in the 2016 election. They don’t talk about it now except for Peter Dutton. What happened is I think they thought they would give the Liberals another chance. I think now people have given up. This government has been in, by the time of the next election, for 2,000 days. What have they done? There was the banking royal commission, but we take a bit of credit for that. Healthcare, though, that’s a big issue with the cuts.

JOURNALIST: The final leg of the trip will be on a plane then, you said end of next week?

SHORTEN: I want to get to every part of Queensland. The bus that I'm on, we're going to go from here, we'll get up to Townsville, it's a matter of whether or not I can fit in Cairns this trip or make a separate trip.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Clive Palmer has been fairly active on Labor’s political spend with political ads. Inaudible?

SHORTEN: Clive Palmer is Australia’s number one digital serial pest and I am going to take Clive Palmer seriously when he pays the $70 million that he owes the workers and his creditors. I will take Clive Palmer seriously when he pays back the taxpayers of Australia who have stepped into his shoes to fulfil his obligations as a conscientious employer. I say to Australians; maybe you think it is funny or maybe you are getting annoyed or whatever by that yellow wallpaper he is papering up all over billboards around Australia, I will just say this; the bloke owes the workers money. The taxpayers of Australia- you and everyone else- have paid his debts for him, so when he contacts you, he is spending your money to annoy you. He should just pay the workers, do his proper obligations and then he can have a welcome to hear whatever he wants to say on everything else.

JOURNALIST: Just when you say-

SHORTEN: Sorry, I did say you were next but you will be the one straight after.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten how flexible is your timing around the first term plebiscite on a republic given that indigenous leaders like Marcia Langton would rather you delay it to give clear air to constitutional recognition. Would you do it in a second term instead?

SHORTEN: Jared, I said at our National Conference, a month ago, that our first priority would be indigenous recognition- that is the timetable we have.

JOURNALIST: But would they be sequential? As in you wouldn’t-

SHORTEN: Yeah, that is what we decided at our National Conference. I think you should be talking about having an Australian Head of state but I think it is long overdue to include our First Australians in the nations birth certificate.

JOURNALIST: Could that include going to the second term, pushing into the second term?

SHORTEN: Listen, I want to win my first election but I admire your confidence in my second term chances.

JOURNALIST: Based on what we saw from the Audit Office yesterday, how confident are you that the Great Barrier Reef Foundation will be able to produce meaningful projects within its budget?

SHORTEN: This government is racked by scandals but I think one of the- I mean I think a lot of Australians are trying to forget 2018 and government politics, it is like a bad dream, until they come back and see them again. But- I think handing $443 million, $443 million to a private charity run by some of the big names in business when they didn’t ask for $443 million in a half hour meeting; that is scandalous. Now we have found out from the audit that the process there was anything but best practice and of course, two of the three architects, handing $443 million of taxpayer money to a private foundation to look after the reef, was of course Malcolm Turnbull- he is gone, that is life. The other two were the current Treasurer and the current Prime Minister. I think the whole thing smells, it is a scandal. The other crazy thing about it is, is the double handling. They are handing money to a private foundation- an amount which they have never handled before, no track record. Then they are making the CSIRO and the universities and government agencies ask the private people to get some of that money back, it is triple handling. The whole thing is a mess. We will take it back and we will just protect the reef.

JOURNALIST: what do you think about the administration costs about being up to $80 million [inaudible] expensive lunches [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: I don’t know what they’re eating. But the point is, I don’t know what the Government was thinking when they handed the money. $80 million to administer government money. I thought that was the job of the government. This Government loves privatisation so much they’ve even privatised their own administration of the reef. And paid the private sector $80 million to do it. I mean, I know ideologically, this Government loves the big end of town, but handing away $443 million of taxpayer money, red hot, and it is one of the scandals which when you push Australians they recall from 2018, how on earth does anyone get $443 million in half an hour when they didn’t even ask for it?

JOURNALIST: Are you heartened by the CFMEU getting its way over Wollongong coal and what message does that send to other employers who use labour hire?

SHORTEN: Well the real issue is labour hire. I think it’s wrong in Australia that you can have people doing the same job of the same skills of the same classification with the same productivity but because the legal identity – one of them works for the actual company, the other works for labour hire – the labour hire worker can be paid far less. How does that improve productivity? How is that fair at all? I’ve got a simple view of life when it comes to workplace relations: same job, same pay.

JOURNALIST: Just very quickly –

SHORTEN: - Alright Amy, last one.

JOURNALIST: Jacinta Price put up a Facebook post speaking about indigenous deaths and she included Linda Burney in that. Given her personal situation which we all know from last year, do you find that to be in bad taste?

SHORTEN: I’m genuinely not aware that she’s done that. I think Linda Burney’s great. And I don’t want to comment any further. I appreciate what you’re asking.  But I don’t want to comment any further. I hope that’s not right. Okay thanks everybody. See you on the bus I hope.

LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Good morning everyone, it's fantastic to be down here at the Palmerston pool, thanks very much for joining us. It's obviously fantastic to have the leader of the Federal Opposition, Bill Shorten with us here today. As you all know, we were out in Kakadu yesterday with some great announcements with the people out there and in support of the town of Jabiru. And it's wonderful to be here today also with the Senator for the Northern Territory Malarndirri McCarthy and also Northern Territory Government local Members from here in Palmerston, Eva Lawler and Tony Sievers. But also because this is a three-way, fantastic project here at the pool, we've got the Acting Mayor Mick Spick who has joined us. I just want to publicly acknowledge the work of the Mayor, Athina Pascoe-Bell who can't be with us here today, but has been a driving force for this fantastic project for the City of Palmerston. This project is right up there with - it's in the top two projects for the City of Palmerston. They've been reaching out for Federal support for this project, so I was very happy to go and continue to advocate for Palmerston to Bill, and that's where we find ourselves here today. The City of Palmerston is growing. This pool has been a fantastic part of this community. Just talking to this morning to people who grew up learning to swim here, now have got their kids here. But it's been 30 years, so the pool needs an upgrade and we need to have more things here for kids to do, right from little bubs all the way through to the teenagers here in Palmerston. So that's what this project is about, but it's more than that, it's bringing in more opportunities and facilities for the seniors. So it's going to be great for the whole community here in Palmerston. Thank you to the City of Palmerston for their leadership on this project and thanks also to the NT Government for partnering in this project. So I'm going to now throw to Bill, it's fantastic to have him up here. Three days in the top end, thanks very much for coming Bill, thanks for supporting this project.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Luke. Good morning everybody. My vision for the Northern Territory is to encourage more people to come and live in this marvellous place, and of course to build more infrastructure. People and infrastructure is the key to the future of the Territory. And Palmerston is amongst one of the fastest-growing communities in the Top End. This is a fantastic facility, but it is a bit tired. Talking to young mums with their first kids, they remember when they were kids learning to swim here. It's time to reinvest in community infrastructure in Palmerston, and indeed the Territory. You know, hats off to Luke Gosling in particular who has advocated, along with the council and the Territory Government, for an upgrade to the Palmerston pool. Every Australian child no matter where they live, deserves the opportunity to learn to swim. Families deserve support where ever they live to help reduce cost of living. A day at the pool is one of the most fun and most cost-effective ways that families can look after the kids during school holidays. But it's more than this. This pool is a part of what makes Palmerston and the Top End more liveable. We all know the challenge to the future of the Northern Territory is to attract more people to live here. So I think this is a very sensible and modest investment, long overdue - to improve the cost of living, to improve the opportunities for kids to learn to swim, to improve the sense of community, and to improve the future of the Northern Territory. I congratulate Luke Gosling and Northern Territory Labor for having such a practical common-sense proposal, and I look forward in the years to come of all of the kids who are going to learn to swim, for all of the kids who have the opportunities which when you grow to an adult and you don't learn to swim, and you don't have confidence around the water, that really means you don't get quite the same chances. So it ticks every box, for the future of the kids, for future of the Territory, for local infrastructure, for liveability, for helping families -  this is really a great common sense project. I might  just ask the Acting Mayor to just say a few comments from the council's perspective and then we can take questions.

MICK SPICK, ACTING MAYOR, CITY OF PALMERSTON: Cheers Bill. First, I would like to thank the council staff who have worked on getting this project off the ground and working towards making it happen. I would like to thank the Territory Government for committing, but also Federal Labor for making that effort to commit the $5 million to this project, that will improve the lives of Palmerston residents. This pool is situated right in the middle of Palmerston and it is easily accessible to everybody in the area. So, it really does provide a lot to community building, healthy lifestyle and activities for everyone in the area, and it is great social infrastructure. It is humbling that we are getting this attention, that people are backing us to provide this support that we need to re-fit the pool and that, to make it be able to be used for the next generation for Palmerston to get in and use it. So yes, thanks.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions for me or my colleagues?

JOURNALIST: Yes. Do you have confidence in NT Labor's ability to manage the economy up here given the state of the budget unveiled by the Treasurer late last year?

SHORTEN: Yes I do. I have been pretty impressed by Michael Gunner and his team and the way that they are determined to make sure that they get their fair share of funding from the national government. They led a great business delegation called Facing North down the Canberra - great success, biggest ever business delegation to Canberra. So they are advocates. But I don't envy the situation which Chief Minister Gunner inherited. The Inpex boom was always going to come to an end, but it is sadly clear that the CLP Government then, sort of acted like the boom would never end, that there would never be a bill to pay for the party they were having. Unfortunately they have sold the TIO, they've sold the port so they have left Territorians with a debt and no plan for the future. But I do believe that from my discussions with the Chief Minister they have a vision for infrastructure and a vision for bringing people here, and of course, a Federal Labor Government are the most reliable partners the Territory can have. I won't adopt the negative sneering attitude of my opposite number who says he's not going to bail out the Territory. Territorians are not looking for a bailout, but they are part of Australia. The Territory and its citizens have paid revenue to Canberra in the good years, so when it is tough Canberra should be there for people in the bad years and the tough years. And of course one thing we'll do to help the Territory economy is we are going to restore penalty rates  if we get elected. Because one of the biggest problems that we have, not just in the Territory but right around Australia, is a lack of confidence by everyday citizens in the economy. More and more Australian families having to dip into household savings just to pay the running costs, and as we approach the start of the school year, pressures are on families. And what we want to do is get wages moving again in Australia. The most common-sentence you hear around Australia is that everything is going up except our wages. So I have got confidence in Labor at the Territory level and of course, our plans to make the economy provide a fair go for all working Australians.

JOURNALIST: Bill how do you make those comments about the CLP, the figures just show that’s clearly not true. (Inaudible) – it remained roughly the same when Labor took over and they delivered two surpluses in that time.

SHORTEN: We discussed this yesterday and my answer hasn't changed but I am happy to repeat it. First of all, you can't forget and have amnesia that during the CLP period, Inpex boomed, and where is all the benefit of that to show? It's gone. It was a sugar hit and this CLP administration basically squandered the boom - so that's one point. The other point I have got to make is that when the CLP came in, Territorians owned the TIO and they owned the port, but they don't now.

JOURNALIST: NT Treasurer Nicole Manison says that to get out of the budget problems, the Government has to cut the rate of expenditure growth. Are projects like this sensible ways to do that?

SHORTEN: I think this is good value for money. First of all, its partnered between the three levels of government. But sometimes in life, we've got to make sure that you don't just look at the price of everything and ignore the value of something. What's the price you put upon thousands of kids in Palmerston learning to swim? I think that is great value. What is the opportunity for young mums being able to get out of home, instead of being isolated and meet with their mother's group here and do some recreation and, you know the kids are in a safe environment. We need to attract more people to the Top End. You aren't going to do that with just a job alone - and that is important of course, but by liveability. A really cracking state-of-the-art swimming pool is more than just a swimming pool. It is a community hub. Now, it might be alright for the Liberals - some of whom are rich enough to have big lavish pools in their own homes, but I want every Aussie kid to have a chance to learn to swim, not just those who can afford their own swimming pool, in-built with all the mod-cons. Sorry, I might share the questions and then come back to you.

JOURNALIST: The rural area has been calling out for a swimming pool for more than a decade. Why not put money to building a pool out there if it's about livability?

SHORTEN: You can't do everything in one go. Senator Malarndirri McCarthy has certainly been a keen advocate for the rural areas to get greater community access, and we will have more to say. But you know, when we announced the Palmerston pool, let's not just always look for the bad in things. This is a good announcement. No one seriously thinks this is a bad idea. I half wondered if the Prime Minister would hop on a jet and come and announce it at  9:00 this morning seeing as we were doing it at 10:00. Can I say to the current government, you are welcome to take this idea, it is a good one.

JOURNALIST: There is a free water park that is literally a minute up the road from here, there is another one that is 15 minutes up the road from here. People where Malarndirri comes from don’t have anything like that. How can you prioritise $5 million on a water park here when there is a park that is almost within reach and those who don’t have anything?

SHORTEN: I'm happy to let some of the locals answer that question. You know, Malarndirri's kids learn to swim here, Luke's been advocating, we've got state reps and we've got council reps here. But it seems to be pretty clear this facility is tired, and Palmerston's a growing community, and I understand and I have learnt that when you talk about Darwin, it's not just the city of Darwin, it's the city of Palmerston. This is my 16th visit to the Territory. I understand very clearly that when we talk about Darwin, we talk about the cities of Darwin and the cities of Palmerston, and Labor's going to be a champion for both communities and the rest of the territory. But why don't I hand over to the locals who have done a lot of the advocacy.

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, LABOR SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY: Thanks. Matt, can I just answer that question in terms of the regions, and it's certainly something that I'm enormously passionate about that our regions - and not only just across the Northern Territory but right across Australia, that as a Labor Party, we are very focused on wanting to make sure that there is a fair go for our remote Australians. Certainly in terms of the Indigenous Advancement Strategy which Senator Scullion seems to spend like it's his own private monies, I would question the amount of money - $5 billion in that strategy alone - how much of that has come to the people of the Northern Territory in these remote regions? Just today, there's been an announcement around $600,000 that is going to entrepreneurs here in the Northern Territory. Well, I'd like to know who they are? Where are they? Are they people in our remote regions who have been desperately calling for this kind of support and funding? And I can tell you now that Labor will be looking very closely at all our announcements in terms of the regions across Australia.

JOURNALIST: If I could just ask you though Malarndirri, surely -

SHORTEN: Sorry, what I might do also is we did ask the council – sorry, I'd like to hear the council's -

JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one question?

SHORTEN: Yes you can but I also want to make sure that we answer your question properly, and I'd like hear the council explain why they think Palmerston's a priority.
JOURNALIST: But can I just ask Malarndirri -

MCCARTHY: I'll come back to you, Matt.

SPICK: With the pool right now, with the expenditure that we're looking at getting right, this pool as Bill said - it's tired. It needs a bit of an injection into it to get it up and running and that. You know, it's making do for right now but what we want to do is make it useful for the future coming up. Future proofing this facility for our Palmerston residents to come in here and actually utilise it effectively would be great. You know, having a facility that isn't one bit from breaking down and actually having it be able to maintain properly and that, is what the council is after. So the expenditure compared to borrow, I mean look, Palmerston is the second largest city in the territory. It is the fastest growing city in the Territory. You are going to get more value for money out of spending money in Palmerston then you will in that remote area. So, to make use of that money, then making use for facility that more people can use. This facility is going to be accessible for people in Coolalinga for Humpty Doo and right further out so you have to consider that as well.
MCCARTHY: Sorry, do want me to jump back in?

JOURNALIST: Malarndirri, you must get a little bit disheartened at times when you see more (inaudible) spend their money pork barrelling in Darwin and Palmerston. I mean look at (inaudible) at the moment. There are plenty of other remote communities that have got no -

MCCARTHY: There are absolutely so many remote communities across Australia, Matt. I tell you what is disheartening, when Tony Abbott is a special envoy comes up here and promises $12 million to Borroloola to deliver houses just before Christmas and nothing has taken place. That is absolutely disheartening. And there is no doubt about it Matt, that of course Labor wants to make sure that whether it's swimming pools or houses or roads infrastructure, that our communities right across Australia get a fair go.

SHORTEN: I will also just remind people that yesterday we announced $220 million for Jabiru in Kakadu, which is not in Darwin. So Labor stands by our record. We're committed to making sure every part of Australia gets a fair go and we're also committed to making sure that all Australians regardless of the wealth of their parents get a chance to learn to swim.

JOURNALIST: So will we see any more announcements from Federal Labor for the bush in the Territory before the election?

SHORTEN: We've got more to say about the bush and of course the Darwin/Palmerston region. I'm going to be a bit of a broken record here but this is my 16th visit to the Territory. Labor is very credibly represented at the national level by Senator McCarthy, by Luke Gosling and by Warren Snowdon. They are a formidable Northern Territory faction in the national capital. And what we will do, is keep announcing infrastructure and initiatives which help working people. I'll just remind you that there are two or three measures which we've already announced which are fantastic for Northern Territorians. One is, Labor is offering people who earn up to $120,000 a tax refund of up to $927. That's real money, every year. So if you're a married couple living in Palmerston, one of you earns $60,000, one of you earns $80,000, a Labor administration in Canberra means that you will get a tax refund over the next three years of nearly $6,000. Another measure that we're going to do is freeze the private health insurance rebate. Now, if you're still fortunate enough to be in private health insurance you'd know your premiums have gone up on average in the last decade, north of 55 per cent. That is making private health insurance literally unaffordable for working Australians. We're going to cap the fee increases at most at 2 per cent per year. That's real money for Australians and that's real money in tax refunds, and of course we're going to unfreeze the Medicare rebate, that's the patient rebate. So we've got a plan to put downward pressure on cost of living and to help provide a tax refund for 10 million working Aussies.

JOURNALIST: Have you got any plans for an announcement in Alice Springs?

SHORTEN: We'll have more to say about Alice Springs coming up.

JOURNALIST: Just on other issues, the AFP has decided not to charge anyone in relation to the leaking of the AFP raids, what's your reaction to that?

SHORTEN: That's a matter for the AFP. I'm respectful of what the police say. The journalists got a tip off, we'll never know who tipped them off - but it wasn't us.

JOURNALIST: There's been another fish kill at Lake Hume in NSW and Victoria. How serious is this problem becoming?

SHORTEN: We've got an ecological disaster in Australia's rivers. When we're seeing unprecedented numbers of river fish dying. A million in the big one most recently in Menindee, but now of course what you've just said about Lake Hume. Australia's river fish are facing a giant threat. This is a Commonwealth issue, it's not enough just to buck-pass the issue. It's an ecological disaster. Anyone who lives along our rivers, anyone who is a recreational fisher person will know this is a disaster. Labor has offered a bipartisan solution to the current Government. We have said we want to set up an emergency science task-force. Let's find out what's happening. I'm not going to say there is a simple explanation, if there was, someone would have already articulated it. But there's clearly a disaster unfolding in Australia's rivers. We need to do better. Let's get the best scientists together in a room, Government and Opposition working together and let's do something to save our remaining fish.

JOURNALIST: The Agriculture Minister says the explanation is drought. Do you agree with him?

SHORTEN: Well, no doubt that is one cause. But again, I don't think that's all the explanation. Now, if he's got the scientists who can say that, let's get them in a room and find out. So I'm not going to 'poo poo' what the Government you know, might offer as an explanation, but Australians expect government and opposition to work together. We have an ecological disaster, an environmental disaster and I just don't like the Government just dismissing people's concerns. This is not business as usual. We've had drought before in our nation, but we're seeing fish dying on an unprecedented scale. Let's get to the bottom of this and work out what's going on.

JOURNALIST: What should Scott Morrison say to the Fijian PM on Thursday about the Neil Prakash issue and how it should be resolved? Has this been embarrassing for Australia?

SHORTEN: It's a good question, what would he say. He could just blame Peter Dutton, most people do. But I don't think that would help at the international level. I think the problem is - Prakash is a seriously bad person in my opinion, and I agree with the Government attempts to hold this fellow to account. But it's important that when we take on the bad guys, the wrong doers, that we do it the right way the first time. Providing legal loopholes which let these people off is the exact opposite of the problem we are trying to solve. So I'm up for working with the Government, you know I don't think they're wrong to try and tackle this fellow, but clearly they've rushed, they've gone I suspect for the headline as opposed to the detail. And when you're dealing with people who would threaten the Australian way of life, we owe it to the Australian people to get it right. Of course Fiji is important, they've said they won't take this fellow back. So I do think that behind the scenes, Mr Morrison should perhaps step in himself or get someone who knows what they're doing to sort this out, because the Home Affairs Minister has got this one wrong.

JOURNALIST: Has it been embarrassing for the Government?

SHORTEN: You can draw your own conclusions if it's embarrassing for the Government. The Prime Minister goes to Fiji to improve relations and then he discovers he's on a recuse mission to repair relations. I'm more worried about stopping this bloke then I am about the Government having egg on its face. And let's work together, but it does annoy me. The Government loves to you know, they brandish their security credentials yet they actually make a mistake? So, let's just get it right. This shouldn't be a political football and I sincerely hope that Mr Morrison can paper over the problems with Fiji caused by his Home Affairs Minister and his lust for a headline.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the states and territories should introduce pill testing at music festivals?

SHORTEN: It's a really complex issue. First of all, it's devastating that people have overdosed and died, that's terrible. My first thoughts to your question would go to the families. I'm a parent of teenagers, you know, they're going to want to go to festivals soon. I want to keep them safe. Now, there are competing views on this question. The police say that what they're taking is illegal so you don't want to make it easier for them to take that illegal substance, I understand that argument. I've spoken to emergency medical professionals who say that you don't want to get a false sense of security by relying on pill testing. On the other hand, if pill testing would have helped save the lives of these young people, you can't rush to rule it out. Now, it is a state issue but I'm happy to talk to our state leaders, talk to the experts, and try and work a path through it. On one hand, it's illegal what they're doing, on the other hand if it's happening and people are dying, do we not have an obligation to make them safer? So it's not an easy issue, I'm not going to point the bone at the Government and say they should be doing X, Y and Z because it's just not that simple. So as a parent, I have conflicting emotions. One thing I will say to young people, when someone is giving you this substance and pills, don't think you are going to have a great time, don't think it's going to make your fun experience of a festival better, it is absolutely not, it is wrong. And the reason why it is wrong is that a lot of these drugs are cooked up by criminals in backyards, they are unsafe automatically and they're further compromised in terms of what they'd provide. So the best thing is for people not to take them, but I live in the real world and I think that if we've got young people taking them, I can understand and sympathise with families who don't want other families to go through it. Thanks everybody, lovely to see you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. It is a real privilege to be here in Kakadu at Jabiru. I want to acknowledge that we are holding this media conference on the land of the Mirrarr people and I acknowledge the traditional owners and their elders, past and present. I think sometimes in our own country, we can be guilty of taking our country and some of its marvellous features for granted. And for too long I think that Kakadu has been neglected. Now we have a time of - if not crisis, of great urgency. The mine, Ranger Mine is coming to the end of its working life. The park has been neglected for too long, the voices of the people here not heard. So today, I'm really pleased to announce that if Labor is elected, we will work with the Northern Territory Government and we will work with the people who live here and the traditional owners to rescue Kakadu, to rescue Jabiru. We see a bright future. This is - as I said at the opening of my conference, Kakadu is one of the world's great, unique gifts. We have an obligation; the National Government responsible for the park, working with the local custodians to uplift, to refresh if you like, this marvellous national asset. If we don't do the work now it'll be too late for our kids and our grandkids to see. This is home, this park, to thousands of mammals and reptiles and birds - unique species. The rest of the world want to come and see what happens here, and I want to make it easier for them to do that. I also want to make sure though, that the locals are at the centre of the decisions which get made. Therefore, I acknowledge the Mirrarr people, the work that they've done over years, the work of the Northern Territory Government more recently, now head by a progressive administration lead by Michael Gunner, the work of Warren Snowdon, Malarndirri McCarthy who are here with me along with Luke Gosling, to put on the national political agenda the need to rescue Kakadu. So I am pleased to announce today that a Labor Government, from its very first budget if elected, will start rolling out a $220 million rescue plan. $100 million for roads, $45 million for asbestos remediation so that people can live here safely. There will be money for a visitor centre not far from where we meet. Michael Gunner has already come to the party. He is backing in with a promise on power and energy, schools and hospitals. Labor will make sure that we involve local contractors and traditional owners every step along the path of the master plan. Labor has got a vision for the Northern Territory, which of course is more than just Kakadu and Jabiru, but if you want to anchor the Territory's future, tourism is a vital linchpin. Labor understands that when we talk to the traditional owners, when we involve our First Australians, when we involve our local community, when we back in tourism, when we back in local business, there is nothing that we can't do as a nation. We are the only country in the world who is custodian to a whole continent. It is up to us to make sure that we hand on a better deal to our kids and grandkids. Let the rest of the world see a little bit of what we see here, because that way we can make sure that we hand on a better deal to those who come after us. I'd now like to invite my friends, the traditional owners, to say some words and of course then Michael Gunner, Chief Minister of the Northern Territory. Gentlemen, over to you.

SIMON MUDJANDI, MIRARR TRADITIONAL OWNER: Hello everyone. This is fantastic news for Jabiru and Kakadu. We are very proud of our country. It is very special and we have a lot to share with visitors. We want to share our country with visitors. We can do this in a way that benefits everybody. We need to protect the country. Kakadu is more than beautiful as landscape and rock art. Aboriginal culture is alive and very deep. We have our 60,000 years of culture here. We want to share that in a new way with tourists, using new technology in the new visitor centre. That hasn't really been done yet. It is something new and exciting. We are also excited at the Reading Resource Centre. This is the place for all the clans in Kakadu to have office and reading space. There will be a language centre, place to meet business people and universities and to really develop Australian business and jobs. This is for all the clans, not just us Mirrarr. We used to have a lot more people visiting Kakadu. We can have more people come in if we plan it properly. All the clans need to be part of the planning for tourism and for roads. We can't leave that to the Board of Management anymore. Thank you.

CORBEN NABANARDI, MIRARR TRADITIONAL OWNER: First of all, I would like, you know, to thank the Liberal Party for supporting - the Labor Party! Sorry. Just ignore that bit. I would like to thank them for supporting us. I believe that this will have great benefit for our young ones for the near future to come. Thank you.

MICHAEL GUNNER, CHIEF MINISTER OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY: This is a sensational day for the Territory, for Jabiru and for Kakadu. We now have a guarantee that after the next Federal election, hundreds of millions of dollars will be invested into Kakadu National Park. We know how important Kakadu is for driving international visitor numbers, for creating local jobs. The best thing about today's announcement, the best thing about Bill's plan - backed by Warren Snowdon, backed by Luke Gosling, backed by Malarndirri McCarthy, the best thing about Bill's plan is it recognises the urgency of action. Under Bill Shorten, under a Federal Labor Government, this money will flow from that first budget in that first term, in that first four years. It is critical that we act and we act now. We know that the Territory is facing tough economic times and it requires the big decisions. It requires the confidence of an Australian party in the Northern Territory and we get that from Bill and we get that from our local Federal members in Warren, Luke and Malarndirri. We recognise the urgency of action as a Territory Government, that is why one of the very first things we did after being elected was to come back to the negotiating table. I still cannot believe that the CLP formally and deliberately decided last term to walk away from negotiations around the future of Jabiru. And when you pair that with the neglect from the current Australian Government, that is a crippling decision for the Territory economy. We acted, we came back to the table. We had our first community caucus and community cabinet here in Jabiru to make sure locals knew that we were backing them, that we will work with the Gundjeihmi about their vision here for Kakadu and for Jabiru. And we have backed them, we have backed locals and we have backed traditional owners and we have backed the Gundjeihmi Aboriginal Corporation. We have provided that five year service guarantee around education and health. We have provided that guarantee around power and water - those basics that people should know that the Government is there for them on. And recognising the importance of action in a month's time, where we will open the Jabiru futures office here in Jabiru. A one-stop-shop about the future of both the park and what is happening here in Jabiru for locals, for businesses who are looking to invest so we can plan properly for the future. We are doing all this in partnership with the traditional owners because that is the way it should be here on Mirrarr country, the way it should be here through the park and all those traditional owner groups, which is one reason why we have taken the advice from the Gundjeihmi around the Bininj Resource Centre; a place here in Jabiru that looks after all those traditional owners, all those people through the entire park - recognise we have got to work together to deliver this. So the best thing about today's announcement, the best thing is that we now know that under Bill Shorten and a Federal Labor Government, this will happen immediately from that first budget. That is what the Territory needs to hear. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Thanks everybody. On my 16th visit to the Northern Territory since I became Opposition Leader, are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Are you surprised that the Prime Minister  rushed here yesterday to try and gazump this announcement?

SHORTEN: Well, they say imitation is the sincerest form of flattery so a good start to the year. Listen in all seriousness, if Mr Morrison wants to borrow some of our ideas, it is fine by me. I mean, getting up 24 hours earlier and wanting to help pull a quick shifty manoeuvre - it is actually a bit of what happens in politics. But what I want to do is - I don't worry about the politics, I worry about the ideas. How good is it for the Top End? How good is for Michael Gunner who has had to argue with the Libs in Canberra? How good is for the people here as the mine closes? How good is it for the traditional owners that both sides of Australian politics are saying rescuing Kakadu is a priority. Now of course the devil is always in the detail. I did notice that the Government in their rush has actually said that they will roll out their promise over 10 years. Kakadu doesn't have 10 years to wait. The people who are working here with the closing of the mine, don't have 10 years to wait. That is why our package is front-end loaded. To put it straight, what we're going to do is put more of the money we're promising in our first couple of years from our first budget because Kakadu and Jabiru need rescuing now, not in 10 years time. The other thing is our proposal, and it is courtesy of the Mirrar people, the Northern Territory Government, the local community - it is just simply more detailed. This is a fact, it is not me blowing our own trumpet. Labor's proposal shows the home work that has happened over a long period of time. I flagged it when the Northern Territory business community came down to Canberra last year, we saw Kakadu as a driving force for tourism in the Territory. So we're putting more money into roads. We are putting more money into asbestos remediation of the houses and the local community. And we're certainly going to make sure that we put a strong and solid investment in environmental management because that's as important as some of the physical infrastructure.

JOURNALIST: Is that roads infrastructure funding going to ensure that places like Jim Jim Falls and Twin Falls can be accessed 365 days a year?

SHORTEN: I will get Warren to go through the detail. In our press release we list the specifics of the four major roads which we will work on. We do want to improve access to some of these falls. There is some marvellous plunge pools, there's some great places to visit, but the nature of these roads is even if we improve some of the access, you still want to use a four-wheel drive. Anyway, I will get Warren to talk a bit further. He has been driving the roads for a while.

WARREN SNOWDON, MEMBER FOR LINGIARI: A long while. We'd hope to be able to get access for 12 months but it unlikely that will happen in some cases. But what we are doing is providing the capacity for as much access all year around as we possibly can. The vagaries of the weather here, everyone knows it - it won't matter how much build-up you do on some of these roads, it won't stop flooding. So we have to be very careful about making sure that the roads are safe and are able to be used, and in consultation with the Bininj and the park management, that will be determine when and if these roads may close in the future. But it is our hope, our sincere hope that this investment will provide almost - if we possibly can, 12 months access.

JOURNALIST: Is this going to be the major commitment from Labor heading into the Federal election, for the Northern Territory?

SHORTEN: No, we will have other policies to outline. For what it is worth, let me remind you though of what we've already promised Territorians. Firstly, we are going to properly fund hospitals, so we are going to reverse cuts that have been made. That is important. We are going to unfreeze the Medicare rebates. Medicare rebates, it's a sort of fancy way of saying it is the patient rebate. So when the Liberals are in power, and this is now my sixth year of opposition so they have been doing this for six years - when they freeze the Medicare payment to the GP, what they are actually doing is freezing the amount of money that mum or dad claim when they go and see the doctor and take the kids. So what it's doing is putting greater pressure on the hip pocket of Northern Territorians. We are going to invest in more renewable energy, we see that as having opportunities for the Territory. We are certainly going to make it easier for Territorians to go to university, by uncapping places at university. So we have already announced some pretty positive policies and of course please don't forget, that if you are a working couple in this country and you earn, maybe one partner earns $60,000 and the other person earns $70,000, in the first three years under a Labor Government, you are going to get back nearly $6,000 as a family in tax refunds. So, we are going to get wages moving, we are going to make sure that you can afford to take your parents or your kids to the doctor. More money for schools and unis and technical training. We are going to spend more money locally, we are going to make sure local contractors access it. We have got a lot more to say about the Northern Territory and hats off to Michael Gunner, he is just interested in an outcome for the Territory. He's just lucky that Labor nationally is listening to him and we have got some good policies which we will work in consultation with local communities. Ultimately, the best thing that we can do in the Territory is attract more people here and that's what we are interested in.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are you aware of the budget crisis the NT Government is dealing with the moment and I just wondered what your thoughts were on that?

SHORTEN: We are very lucky today to actually have the man who is running the NT Government, I am running for Prime Minister. But what I promise the Northern Territory is we're not going to neglect Kakadu. We're not going to leave Jabiru to work it out on their own. We're not going to leave Michael Gunner to have to deal with the reckless spending of his profligate CLP predecessors who left the books of the Territory in a shocking situation. So we are going to be partners to the Territory. In schools, in university, in training the apprentices, in making sure that we have got the proper investment in our health care system and our hospitals. But as I said, we have got the Chief Minister here so I am sure he's happy to deal and talk about the legacy which a lazy, divided CLP Government in the Territory left Territorians, and of course I'm happy to talk further about how the Federal Government has presided over a slowing economy nationally. I mean, when you take out export of mining and commodities overseas, the national economy is not pretty. If you take out the number of public service jobs that have been created, the rate of jobs growth in recent months in the private sector - not pretty. If you look at the fact that in the south-east part of Australia, we see housing prices falling under this Government, in part because the regulators and the banks haven't been able to do their job properly, it is not pretty. When you look at wages growth - stagnant. I mean everywhere you go in Australia, the most common sentence you hear over the BBQ is everything is going up except my wages. But anyway, you didn't ask me about the national economy, I will hand over to Michael.

GUNNER: We know that the Territory is going through tough economic times at the moment. We have got to do everything we can to create local jobs. We have to have that plan that we are putting in place around the post-Inpex days. Now the CLP last term sold everything, spent everything and left $900 million deficit. That is the exact opposite of what you do if you want to have a plan in place for the post-Inpex period. That has left us a difficult rope to walk. The things that we can expect from an Australian Government that cares about Territorians is that you recognise the importance of things like health. Now, Bill touched on health just before. The current Australian Government walked away from a deal around 50/50 funding around hospitals and they are looking to place a cap and activity-based funding and make that retrospective. Those are crippling decisions for the Territory budget when it comes to how we manage health here in the Northern Territory. You need an Australian Government that understands the basics, understands the importance of investing back into health, and that's what we will get under a Bill Shorten Labor Government. As a territory, we are doing everything we can to keep creating those local jobs, recognising support and to cushion the blow post-Inpex and we will do all that in these tough budget times. But we want and need a government who understands, in Canberra, the importance of the Territory, the importance of acting now and the importance of investing in the right things, and we will get that under a Bill Shorten Labor Government.

JOURNALIST: The CLP delivered two budget surpluses in four years in power and left a similar amount of debt that they were left by the Henderson Government. You can't seriously stand here can you and blame four years of the CLP for the budget crisis that your government is in?

GUNNER: It sets the context for what we're doing right now. So Inpex winding down was not breaking news and it's something that you had to plan for. The CLP going to the last election got desperate and they sold everything, spent everything and left a $900 million deficit. There was no money in the bank for that important area that you need to do when something winds down, that stimulus funding to create those jobs and soften the blow. So we have had to walk this tight rope about putting money into stimulus projects to create those local jobs, from $100 million into public housing and turbo charging tourism to other stimulus projects to cushion that blow. We have had to do all that, based off the fact that the CLP had no plan in place for post-Inpex. So we have had to put our economic plan in place through tough budget times. We are going to make those tough decisions, we have made the tough decisions. The next budget will be a difficult one and a challenging one. We are going to make it knowing that Territorians are doing it tough and they need local jobs and that is our priority as a government.

JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison basically ruled out any prospect of a Federal bailout from a Liberal Government, will you be asking a Labor Government for a bail out?

GUNNER: So for me, I do not expect a ‘Hail Mary’ from Canberra. What I want is an Australian Government that recognises the priorities of the Northern Territory, our social challenges, our economic challenges and investing in those things that create jobs, develops the north, and investing in those things that closes the gap. We will get that under a Bill Shorten Labor Government. This is not about begging, this is about fighting for what is fair for Territorians. We are part of Australia, we need a Government that recognises that and invests in that. And I know we will get that under Bill Shorten supported by Warren Snowdon, Luke Gosling and Malarndirri McCarthy.

SHORTEN: Sorry, just to finish on that, let's face it, the CLP had an Inpex party and then when they were running out of money, they sold the TIO and the port and they, you know basically left the Territory poorer than when they found it with fewer assets. Everyone knew that Inpex was coming to an end. The CLP did not prepare for anything except more debt for Territorians and this is in the Liberal Party's DNA nationally. Did you know, that since Abbott and then Turnbull and now the current fellow that got elected, that net debt for every Australian was about $9,000 - net government debt, now it's north of $21,000. This is classic Liberal Party stuff and I am worried this year that they are getting so desperate, they are just going to spend the farm and leave nothing for anyone who comes after the next election, and they are doing it at a time when our economy is not as healthy as it should be. The reality is that wages are flat-lining, your power bills are up, your private health insurance premiums - if you can still afford private health insurance, are going up and up and up. You know, the problem is, this is a Government who is out of touch, and the reason why they are out of touch in Canberra is the same reason that Michael Gunner inherited problems from the CLP in the Territory -  they are chaotic and divided. They spent the whole summer focusing on themselves and not the people.

JOURNALIST: While we're on federal issues, Cathy McGowan won't recontest her seat at the next election, what is your reaction to that?

SHORTEN: I congratulate Cathy McGowan for being an active Member for Indi. The Liberals took it for granted for a very long time. She got a lot done in that area and no doubt the new independent they are running, Helen Haines, is a distinguished health practitioner and midwife, and no doubt she will give the conservatives a run for their money in north-eastern Victoria. But I congratulate Cathy. She leaves on her terms and she has made her mark and there's little more that you can hope for in politics than to be able to do some of those things.

JOURNALIST: Alex Hawke said he would be open to changing Australia Day if a majority of people supported it. Would you support a potential date change through a popular vote, or putting it to a popular vote?

SHORTEN: What is it with the Nationals and the Liberals and Australia Day? Do you know how you know Australia Day is coming up each year, other than looking at the calendar?The right wing of Australian politics get themselves into a lather about it. Like it's a day where you catch up with your family and friends and you celebrate that we live in a great country. Listen, I'm not going to down every rabbit hole of every thought bubble of every right wing Liberal politician about Australia Day. You know, I did say yesterday, so long as it is a public holiday and if Australia Day falls on the weekend, so long as it is on the nearest Monday, that is pretty much where I think we need to go.

JOURNALIST: So you're open to changing that date?

SHORTEN: No, I'm just not going to engage. If all the Liberal Party is offering Australia in 2019 is what day we have a public holiday on, well they have run out of ideas, haven't they? Why is it that I can never get the Liberals to talk about making sure that Aussie kids get apprenticeships? Why is it that we never have a debate with the Liberals about the fact that first home buyers are forced out of the market by an unfair tax system? Why is it that they're not getting upset that you have 120,000 older Australians who can't get packages for aged care? These are the issues that matter. Why is it they ever fire up about rising power bills or low wages growth? Why is it they couldn't, you know raise a pulse when it comes to tackling the banks on a Royal Commission? I will never forgive the Liberal Party and the current Prime Minister for voting 26 times against having a Royal Commission into the banks, 26 times they ran a protection racket for the banks. When it comes to Australia Day, they have got a queue a mile long wanting to talk about it.

JOURNALIST: So do you oppose changing that date or not?

SHJORTEN: I am happy to keep Australia Day on the 26th of January.

JOURNALIST: Four Aboriginal children committed suicide recently, what's your government's plan to do something about that?

SHORTEN: Well I will get Warren and Malarndirri to supplement this answer, but the first thing to say is the death of any child is simply a tragedy. There is no doubt in my mind that we need to invest more working with First Australians, to change those alarming rates. I might hand over to both Warren and Malarndirri who between them have got decades of service in this very important issue.

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY: Thanks. That's certainly a real concern right across the country, and as Bill says any child, any person that we lose through suicide is one with deep sorrow right across the country and for families who experience it. In terms of First Nations people, we know that through our First Nations Caucus, that we are trying to deal with policies that impact directly on our communities. Policies around mental health, certainly with rheumatic heart disease, with issues with gay and lesbian First Nations people. We know that Black Rainbow is something that is important in terms of supporting mental health and counselling. We just have got to keep working and implementing these policies so that they are about making a difference for families and their lives right across Australia and not just for First Nations people but for all those who lose family members to suicide.

SNOWDON: Can I just add that suicide and mental health generally, are key issues for Aboriginal and community-controlled health services right across this country and for public health practitioners including the Northern Territory Government. We have been trying to develop and working in partnership with them, around suicide action plans and we will continue to do that and indeed with the current Government around what we can do to address the horrific rates of suicide across many Aboriginal communities -  First Nations communities across the country. It is not an easy solution and I don't think anyone believes it is. But we have got to be working with communities at the local level. We have got to be working with the health providers at the local community level and working in partnership with the traditional owners. If we can do that, then we can get some solutions which may work. We won't get them, the solutions will not be found by me or someone else pontificating on what needs to be done. It needs to be working with people to try and get solutions which they can manage in their own communities. We are working with – as I say we have already been working with the current Federal Government, Ken Wyatt, around those issues. But we are in constant conversation around health strategies to deal with mental health and suicide prevention.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Peter Dutton has said that Labor will abandon Operation Sovereign Borders and be soft on people smugglers – what’s your thoughts on that?

SHORTEN: Just complete rubbish. The Home Affairs Minister is sounding more desperate every day, a lot like his colleagues. What they do when they say these lies is that they are actually encouraging people smugglers to try their hand against the Australian system. We do support strong borders. We will do everything we can to stop the people smugglers getting back into business. I mean, if the Federal Government was fair dinkum, they should perhaps reverse the funding cuts they have made which have seen a reduction in the number of Australian Federal Police officers working in the region. So it is rubbish, we want to keep our borders safe. The Government's just saying this stuff to encourage the people smugglers and to basically try and get some cheap political point of difference. In 2019 I hope that this ramshackle Coalition of divided people, who spend more time arguing with each other than thinking about the nation - I thought they would have got the message over the summer break. Don't come back with the old politics of always just being negative about your opponents, offer us your own positive ideas. That is why we are here up in Kakadu. And I'm rapt, if the Government want to back in the same ideas we are pushing, I mean, they should look at our detail as well as just the headline, well that's fine by me. But this negativity, where they are trying to make up stories to scare Australians, it is just rubbish.

JOURNALIST: How much damage has the Government done to our relationship with Fiji by cancelling Neil Prakash's citizenship without consulting the Fijians?

SHORTEN: Yes, it just seems to me it was a summer stunt. Like, don't get me wrong, everything that I have read about Prakash, not a good man – bad man, full stop. I don't want him back here, the Home Affairs Minister and I, we agree on that. But you don't stop the criminals and the terrorists by fluffing the legal procedures. You don't rush out and say we're going to stop this fellow by one particular legal mechanism and close the back door and square it off with the Fijian Government. I hope the Prime Minister is able to sort out this particular embarrassment and incompetence, because for me, stopping terrorists isn't just about a headline to you know, pump up the tyres of your opinion polls, it is about every day, 365 days of the year, stopping the bad people from doing bad things to this country and do it right the first time rather than constantly having to do patch up and band-aid jobs.

JOURNALIST: What should the Government do about the fish that are dead?

SHORTEN: Well I was on leave when I heard about the million fish in the Murray Darling Basin just dying. This is shocking. This is not another day at the office. Now, I think the problems are complex, don't get me wrong. From algal bloom to the hot weather, you know, I get that it is not a simple solution, otherwise someone would have simply solved it. But I think the Government should set up an emergency task force, involve the Opposition because we are close to an election now. That is all the Government talk about, so I think we should be partners in this. I have actually asked Tony Burke, my Shadow Minister to come off leave and go to Menindee today, and that's where he is, talking to the locals. You're not going to sort out anything by sitting in an office in Canberra - an air-conditioned office in Canberra. Get out on the ground. My bloke's out there on the ground right now. The Government and us should work together because you can't ignore a million dead fish. That is a shocking development.

JOURNALIST: Clive Palmer has a new computer game that shows you as a cockroach getting squashed. Do you have any reaction on that?

SHORTEN: I find that all I would like Clive Palmer to do is pay the workers the money he owes, and repay the Australian taxpayers the money they have had to pay, to pay the workers that he won't pay. I wont take him seriously, and I don't think any of you should either. He can find money for billboards with a vacuous sort of message, or he can pay the workers the money he owes them. To my way of thinking, you look after the workers who have made you the money, you don't look after yourself. The taxpayers had to step in and help look after these workers. He owes the workers of Townsville and the taxpayers of Australia, he owes them a cheque before he starts playing his other sort of silly games which actually put Australian politics into the ridicule bin.

JOURNALIST: There's lots of workers up there who are desperate for work, and one of the projects up there is the Adani coal mine. Why won't you support that project?

SHORTEN:  First of all, when you talk about it, the number of people who are to be employed in this coal mine has dropped from 10,000 to just over 1,000. So I have heard a lot of figures being mentioned, even sometimes in the media. But you know, I will believe it when I see it. What Labor has got for jobs in Townsville is we propose widening the port - that'll mean that bigger vessels come in, tourism vessels and cargo vessels. It'll mean that truck trips down south to southern Queensland puts less wear and tear on our roads. I think that's a sensible development. It was Labor who led the way to build the Townsville stadium, but what we've insisted on is local contracts. So I've got practical proposals from the widening of the port, to improving the road infrastructure which will lead to real jobs. In the meantime, I am not putting all my eggs in the basket of the Adani coal mine happening. I think what people expect from their politicians is real practical plans, not just believing other people's promises. And never forget, that Adani has missed plenty of deadlines, so you know, what sort of person would one be if we said just trust this happening and ignore all the other marvellous opportunities that North Queensland has.

JOURNALIST: Do you think you'll be returning to Parliament or going to an election?

SHORTEN: This is a government who has run out of steam. Now, I've started the new year, I'm refreshed, I'm re-energised, I'm pretty excited by 2019 and putting forward Labor's positive vision. This is a government who spent their summer - I think the Home Affairs Minister paid out on Malcolm Turnbull again, having got rid of him. You see them complaining about the lack of women in the Liberal Party and the National Party. I'm afraid they're still focused on themselves. We're ready whenever the election is called. I think the Australian people just want stability. I had plenty of people come up to me over summer who said I don't normally vote Labor, or I voted conservative, or voted for someone else, but we're just sick of the instability, when will you politicians put us first and not yourselves. So I've come up to the Northern Territory, it's by 16th visit I'm pleased to say, I've been here for 32 days since I've been Opposition Leader. I've learnt a lot in that time, I've learnt about the important issues - I've learnt that the Northern Territory is more than just Darwin and Palmerston. I've also learnt the importance of having a diverse economy, and also that the Federal Government has a role to play in the Territory, working with conscientious government, and working with locals. Whenever Mr Morrison calls the election it'll be a hard fight for Labor. Did you know that Labor has only won from Opposition to Government nationally, three times since World War II? So it is a pretty difficult issue, it is difficult. But I have a united team, I've got a talented team, I've got a team who are focusing on policies. We can explain to you how we'll help lower your power prices, how we'll help make sure that your health bills go down not up. We've got a plan to help boost people's wages, we've got a plan for infrastructure, we've got a plan, for example today, to help promote tourism, cultural environmental values in Kakadu. We've got a plan for all of Australia from our First Australians and giving them a greater voice, right through to helping reduce the aged care waiting lists for our older Australians. Whenever the Government calls an election, they'll be worried about calling it when they think they can win, what I'm going to worry about is how I can provide the best possible government for the people of Australia. Thank you very much.
JOSH BURNS, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR MACNAMARA: Thank you everyone for coming, it's a really lovely day here in Albert Park and I have the great pleasure of welcoming Bill Shorten, the leader of the Labor Party and our Shadow Minister for Health, Catherine King to the beautiful Albert Park. We've just spent a bit of time with some families and some really inspiring kids living with type one diabetes and Catherine and Bill have made some really exciting announcements so it gives me great pleasure to hand over to the Leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Hello everybody and might I say it's fantastic to be back off leave, I'm refreshed and reenergised and I'm ready for 2019. I have to say that it would appear that the Government, the Liberals have had a summer of stuff ups and scandals, they're just focused on themselves whereas I'm focused on making sure that Australians get the best possible healthcare in the world. That's why we're so excited to make an announcement today that we want to find a cure for juvenile diabetes, for diabetes type one. We are committing $50 million extra to research to help supplement and expand clinical trials and treatment. We should never forget in this country that the Australian science and research, our medical research, is world-class. From the cochlear implant which is helping little children hear all over the world, to the gardasil vaccinations, we've seen our medical science and researchers achieving remarkable outcomes. Australians punch above their weight when it comes to science and research. And what we've found, is that when government helps science and research, our medical researchers help the nation and the world. So this $50 million will help with more clinical trials, it'll help with 120,000 Australians currently living with type one diabetes. I take off my hat to the junior advocates who have been out there campaigning and educating us and their parents to make sure that we provide more funding for research and that's what we are going to do. And what I promise Australians in 2019, in an election year, is simply this, we're ready to govern. We're united, we're stable, we're focused on the people of Australia and there's no issue more important to Aussies than the health of them and their kids. So today's announcement is a fantastic start to a new year. $50 million will help the best researchers in the world come up with a cure for type one diabetes. I'd now like to hand over to Catherine King to talk further about this great announcement prioritising the health of our kids and making sure that a government is on the side of Aussies, when they are not doing well when it comes to their health.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, Bill. It's terrific to be here with Josh Burns, our candidate for Macnamara here in Albert Park and Bill Shorten. The first announcement of 2019 is a health announcement and it's an announcement of $50 million to help find a cure for type one diabetes. This $50 million has come at the request of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, an organisation that we kick-started when we were last in government with our research investment for their clinical research network. The money is to go on expanding clinical trials, to improving translation particularly in the area of prevention but also in treatment for people with type one diabetes, but also in supporting the fantastic talent we have here in this country of type one diabetes researchers. Over 120,000 people, a lot of them young children, are living with type one diabetes and they have had one message to us, they've been up to Parliament, they've had one message to politicans and the Labor Party in particular, they want us to invest $50 million in finding a cure and I couldn't be prouder today. Our first announcement of 2019 while the other mob have been busy spending the summer in dissent, in arguing among themselves, we've been busy doing the policy work and in our first announcement in 2019 here in the health space - $50 million for juvenile diabetes, thanks.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Catherine, thanks Josh. Are there any questions on this announcement or any other matters?

JOURNALIST: You're announcing millions of dollars today on diabetes and you've got a big announcement on Kakadu, is this the official start of the 2019 election campaign?

SHORTEN: Well, over the summer, people would come up and talk to me about politics. And they had one common view regardless of being Liberal, Labor, National or anything, they just want stability. What the Australian people want and what they've told me over summer and what they've told my colleagues is we want a united political party, tick that's Labor. We want stable leadership, tick that's Labor - this is my sixth January as Opposition Leader. And they want policies which talk about the people, their everyday issues. Sometimes I think politicians over-complicate politics. What people want to know is that when they're sick or their child is sick, can they afford to see a doctor, can they get the best quality healthcare? And what we're doing today, spearheaded by Catherine King is we're putting additional money to find a cure to type one diabetes. What they want to know is that there is a government with a plan to take action on cost of living, that's what we're going to do, we're going to get wages moving again, we're going to make sure that we tackle the ballooning costs of private health insurance and of course we're going to put renewable energy at the centre of all our energy policies which is good for the environment but it's also good for power prices. There will be an election this year, we're ready, we're united and we're looking forward to the challenge of offering a positive program for Australians.

JOURNALIST: What is the difference between the Government's commitment and Labor's promise there?

SHORTEN: This may sound a little unusual for me to say, but I genuinely don't mind if the Prime Minister wants to take some of our ideas and announce them. I mean he perhaps tried to be a bit clever, tried to outsmart us by taking our ideas and announcing it 24 hours earlier, but that's genuinely okay. Because what the Government don't understand, is that I don't care about the politics, I care about the issues. And the good news for the top end of Australia is that they're going to see guaranteed investment of infrastructure, roads, management of Kakadu, of helping Jabiru or the Ranger mine site move from mining back to an environmental purpose. The beautiful thing about the top end and Kakadu in particular, is it's unique in the world. Given the right investment, given the right infrastructure, I'm excited that people all around the world will be able to come to Kakadu and see something that they cannot see anywhere else in the world. Sometimes as Australians we take our own country for granted. The fact of the matter is, we're a beautiful continent, we're also custodians of the environment. I think it's fantastic that we're both going to announce greater support for the Kakadu park, make sure that people from around the world and future generations can see this amazing, unique environment.

JOURNALIST: As you said it's only 24 hours difference [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: We're certainly going to put around $220 million into it and I'm certainly happy to provide the details. What's happened is, that the tourism and the environment at Kakadu has been neglected I think for too long a period of time. At the same time, if you like, we have tended to rely on nature's luck and take it as our own sort of good luck. Whereas as we know for the future, we've got to make our luck by investing. This is not a handout to the environment or to the region, this is an investment. Again and again we will see the dividend of investing in Kakadu not only in tourism, not only in jobs, not only in preserving the environment but making sure that our kids and our grandkids get to see what we can see. We are the only country in the world who are custodians of a whole continent. With that, comes an obligation to make sure that we preserve our environment so future generations can see the marvellous, unique features of Australia that we can see today.

JOURNALIST: The Federal Government wants to force councils to hold citizenship ceremonies on Australia Day, do you support that move?

SHORTEN: You sort of know when Australia Day is coming up, don't you when you get the annual conservative outing to put politics into Australia Day. It's just a piece of politics. Labor isn't going to move Australia Day, unless of course it falls on the weekend and we will have the public holiday on the Monday. Labor is determined to keep Australia Day as a public holiday. Beyond that, I'm not going to get too into the politics, we'll consult with councils and people and see if the idea works and we'll wait to see what the reaction is.

JOURNALIST: So should councils though have the freedom to change their citizenship ceremonies? As we've seen in Darebin and Yarra and Byron Bay and Fremantle? Do you respect their right to make a call or do you want the federal government to make a blanket ruling?

SHORTEN: I think we all know what's happening, it's a couple of weeks before Australia day. In January, it's a bit of slow news, the Government is trying to play a bit of politics. It's what the conservatives do to keep their base happy, talk about this. There are 537 councils in Australia, about 530 of them already have citizenship ceremonies on Australia Day. We'll see what they're proposing. One thing that I pledge though, is under me, Australia Day will always be a public holiday.

JOURNALIST: Has Emma Husar told you that she will move to the crossbench and if so [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, Emma has not confirmed that she's moving to the crossbench and I'm not going to go into private conversations. I think some of the treatment that she has received has been unfair but she has also made the decision not to run and we've got a fantastic candidate running in Lindsay, Di Beamer who enjoys my complete support.

JOURNALIST: So with that unfair treatment, would you like to explain a little bit more?

SHORTEN: I'll leave that to NSW Labor.

JOURNALIST: The Treasury data was published yesterday about superannuation tax changes which they say one million people are going to be affected by your policies.

SHORTEN: Treasury data?

JOURNALIST: Yeah, well.

SHORTEN: Press release from the Government, not taking that too seriously. Let's talk about superannuation. Australians are sick and tired of too many changes to super, we want to make sure that our fees have downward pressure and that's one of the best ways to make sure that we get better returns for people. It's Labor who wants to make sure that when you go on maternity leave that you get superannuation so we're the party who created superannuation, we'll keep defending it. And after all, we've been the party who called for the banking royal commission. The current Prime Minister voted against it 26 times. What has emerged is that whilst the Government has got very upset about non-bank superannuation funds, some of their returns have been better than the banks who this Government has been protecting shamelessly for years.

JOURNALIST: On the issue of Rahaf al-Qunun, the Saudi woman, do you think that the Federal Government dragged its feet on processing this application? Do you think Canada has shown that it's more of a welcoming country than Australia by processing this claim quicker?

SHORTEN: Oh listen I think that's a bit of a hard one. By that, I certainly would have welcomed - I wrote to the Government and said I supported her being processed as a refugee. Women around the world and not just in parts of Saudi Arabia receive very poor treatment and I think she had a legitimate, very real case and she was making that case. I was just relieved that she has found a place to go to, so if the Canadians take her or if we take her, you know at the end of the day for me, it's not which country takes her it's that this woman safe. And I think we need to redouble our advocacy globally about making sure that women are not subject to violence and of course we need to do a lot more in 2019 to protect women in Australia from violence.

JOURNALIST: But why can Canada accept her within a day while we're still considering it? What signal does that send?

SHORTEN: I understand the question. I think that's something for the Government to explain. Clearly she was a woman in great distress and I think that we should do everything we can, I don't know the ins and outs of what happened in the 24 hours and the 48 hours. I know that when the media report it, even though I was on leave, I certainly wrote to the Government and offered them my complete support to help process this young woman and provide her a safe haven free of violence.

JOURNALIST: Josh Frydenberg spent a lot of time in the last few weeks attacking your policies around tax, negative gearing and super. Are you comfortable with the analysis showing that one million people would be paying the top tax rate under Labor?

SHORTEN: I understand that the Government is going to try and scare people this year because they have run out of ideas. I think the current Treasurer is the third Treasurer. What I heard travelling over summer is that people are sick of the instability, they're sick of the complete negativity. What we're doing is we’re treating the Australian people with respect by putting our policies out there. We've got well-funded policies, we are going to reform the tax system but I think it is worth reminding Australians that we're offering better tax cuts, better tax refunds for nearly 10 million Australian workers. I think that as people approach the election, whenever it is, in March or early May, Labor is offering better tax cuts for 10 million working Aussies. It's equivalent to a pay rise of about $927 for each Australian who earns between $41,000 and $90,000. I think that's going to make a difference. For a married couple, both of whom earn between $60,000 and $80,000, if they vote Labor at the next election, they're going to get nearly $6,000 back in tax refund in the first term alone. Thank you everybody, see you on the trail.

KATE ELLIS, MEMBER FOR ADELAIDE: It is my absolute pleasure to have the chance to welcome Bill and Chloe Shorten, and their beautiful family to Adelaide. Under Bill's leadership of course for the last five years, we have enjoyed a united, stable team focused on the best policies for the future of Australia. And of course, all of that is going to come together over the next few days with our national conference when we make sure that in contrast to our opponents who are focused on themselves, making it up as they go along, we will be debating and outlining our plans to tackle the challenges of the future. We are so very pleased to be hosting Bill and Chloe in Adelaide, and to be welcoming 400-odd delegates here. We hope you all have a wonderful time, and on behalf of the South Australian Labor team who is here behind me, can I just thank you for coming to Adelaide, but also for having such a commitment to Adelaide and South Australia over the last five years, it is noted and appreciated. So I'll hand over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Kate. It's great to be at the Adelaide Central Market. It's one of the many reasons why I love South Australia. For the record, this is my 32nd visit to South Australia since I've been Opposition Leader. And in fact, since the 2016 election I've been here for about 25 days. Chloe and I will also get the chance to catch up with some of her family who live in South Australia. I'm here today with Penny Wong, South Australia's senior Labor representative in the Federal Parliament, and of course with Tony Zappia, our Member for Makin, and our great candidate, Nadia Clancy who is running in the bellwether seat of Boothby. Today, I'm pleased also to say that we are here because the Labor Party like South Australia so much, we're holding our national conference. The National Conference opens tomorrow; it's our 48th National Conference. It's the longest running national conference of any political party, from Australia's oldest political party. What I hope to see in the coming days is energetic, enthusiastic debate. The best thing that the Labor Party has are its members and supporters, and I believe we will see the energy and the passion on display. And I also think in what is the least estimated, but perhaps the most valuable proposition that Labor presents the Australian people at the federal election, within the next five months - it's a united team, it's an energetic and it’s a team with vision. So we are very much looking forward to our visit to South Australia, and hearing all of the very important issues which South Australians think are important to the future of this great state. Penny and I are happy to take any questions on any matters.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, DFAT yesterday upgraded their precautions in Indonesia for Australians travelling due to Scott Morrison's likely announcement. Are you concerned that the decision around Jerusalem might put Australians at risk overseas?

SHORTEN: I am assuming you've asked about the Prime Minister's -

JOURNALIST: Jerusalem - yes.

SHORTEN: I don't know if you can hear the answer over our friends, but I believe that Mr Morrison decision today is a humiliating backdown. All right. I appreciate your point and I am happy to talk to. You've made your point which is fine. Now, we're going to talk about some issues because (inaudible). I am happy to talk to you after this. If you don't respect the offer of a conversation, if you don't respect the idea that there are other issues important (inaudible), I can't stop you but that would be a shame and undermine the important message you've got. No, it's all right. Listen, we live in a free country and they have made their point and it really doesn't worry me that much. Ok, going back to the question of Jerusalem. We are having an argument about something that most Australians didn't realise was a problem. It's been a humiliating back down by Mr Morrison. I am not sure when he rushed the announcement of moving the embassy that he really knew what he was doing. I’m tempted to think it was a sort of, rookie mistake by an L-Plate Prime Minister. But it is a little more serious than that. My fear is that Mr Morrison hasn't just had to do a political back down, my fear is that he has made Australia look stupid on the international stage. Conflict in the Middle East is a complex issue. People have been trying to resolve it for decades, and there are very strongly held views on both sides. Rushing in and making a premature announcement about Middle Eastern foreign policy just to sort out a domestic political by-election in Wentworth, I feel was risky and foolish. What I am worried about is that Mr Morrison put his political interest ahead of our national interest. So you know, I regret that we've seen a complex debate derailed by reckless and foolish behaviour. Australian Government foreign policy on the Middle East can't afford to be dictated by short-term polling considerations in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Will the back down as you call it, save the trade deal with Indonesia?

SHORTEN: I sincerely hope the trade deal with Indonesia occurs. It's not just me saying it as the Opposition Leader, but everyone from Indonesia to local business in Australia have all expressed concern. This decision was a very rushed decision.

JOURNALIST: Do you think - there have been concerns raised that the decision in relation, or any decision in relation to the embassy could lead to protests in Indonesia or increase the risk of terrorism. Do you think there is any grounds for that?

SHORTEN: Well Australia should always make its foreign policy without fear of threats from other people around the world. You know, I respect the right of Australia to have an independent foreign policy. But I do really think it has been a foolish and risky bungle by the Government because what they have done is they didn't consult the ADF, they didn't consult our security experts, they didn't have a proper cabinet process. And now as everyone has predicted, the Government has walked away from their initial rush of blood to the head. It really was a rookie mistake that just had repercussions for our relations in the region. I might get Penny Wong, our Shadow Foreign Affairs spokesperson, to talk further about this reckless and foolish behaviour.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Look I just want to make a few comments because I think Bill has covered it. This is a decision which is all risk, all risk and no gain. A humiliating back down that puts Australia in the position of just a handful of countries like I think Russia, the Czech Republic. A humiliating back down that continues to present risk to Australia's relationship in the world, and within the region. And for what? Let's be very clear about why this decision has been made: this is Scott Morrison trying to dig himself out of a hole of his own making, that's what this is about, and that is not how you run foreign policy. You don't put your domestic political interests above Australia's national interest and that is what this government has done.

JOURNALIST: Would you say that Mr Morrison is scraping the barnacles off?

WONG: No, I think he is just as I said, digging himself out of a hole he put himself into. But the sad thing is it the country's national interest which has been compromised.

JOURNALIST: But is it a terrorism risk or not?

WONG: Well, we are responsible party of government - and I think Bill answered that correctly. We are not going to speculate about those sorts of issues. Government should ensure that they keep Australians safe. We are entitled as a nation to make our foreign policy according to our national interest. So our criticism of Mr Morrison is that he has not made this decision, or the decision in Wentworth in the national interest, he has made it in Scott's interest. And that is not how you should run foreign policy.

JOURNALIST: If we could ask the Labor Leader Bill Shorten a question about  your franking credits policy. Now you're here today with the candidate for Boothby, Nadia Clancy, there's research out today suggesting that more older voters are actually really concerned about that franking credit policy, particularly in the seat of Boothby. Is it a danger to you in electorates that have a higher population of seniors, which is going to be the case quite a lot in South Australia?

SHORTEN: Labor is the party of the fair go for all Australians. It is neither sustainable nor fair for some people to get a tax income refund when they've paid no income tax. That's at the heart of our policy. When the Government pays a payment for owning shares and getting dividends, that was to compensate for income tax that's paid by the person who owns the shares. But these days what we're seeing is people are getting income tax refunds when they pay no income tax. It's not illegal, but it’s not sustainable and it certainly isn't fair. And when we talk about older Australians, what worries me is the fact that there's 120,000 people waiting for aged case packages. What worries me, is that there's 420,000 of our fellow Australians who have been diagnosed with dementia and we don't have enough funding in our aged care system to support them. What worries me is that we’ve see the out of pocket costs for going to see a GP go up and up. We've seen the out of pocket costs to go and see specialists go up and up. What I'm seeing is that older Australians are disproportionally on the receiving end of the brunt of Mr Morrison's health care cuts, and I want to find money in the Budget to make sure that all Australians are guaranteed quality health care no matter how old they are.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) if you are elected, will you reverse this decision?

SHORTEN: First of all on the Jerusalem question, let's say what really happened. Mr Morrison has tried to copy Donald Trump, and he's failed to even do that. Labor's position is the view of the sensible world opinion and the best advice within Australian foreign policy. What we believe is that Jerusalem should be recognised as the capital of both Israel and Palestine as part of the final stages of a negotiated two-state peace deal between Palestine and Israel. And the problem that Mr Morrison has done, is he keeps trying to reverse engineer to cover up for his initial mistake. He shouldn’t have said he was going to move the embassy like Donald Trump has done. Mr Morrison, we're not American, Mr Morrison shouldn't have done that, and ever since then everything that he's said since has been to cover up for his initial mistake. What Mr Morrison is doing is confusing stubbornness with leadership. What he's doing is confusing his own political interests with our national interests.

JOURNALIST: So will you reverse it?

SHORTEN: I've just said, we will do it at the final stage and we're not at the final stage of a two-state peace deal.

JOURNALIST: Inaudible question

SHORTEN: Well as Penny said, Labor is a responsible party of government. I don't believe any government puts people's lives in danger knowingly or willingly, nor should they. But I think the Australian and indeed people all around the world have said, normally Australia's pretty savvy on Foreign Policy. We might be a middle power, we're not a great power, but we've got a good reputation globally for making the right calls, for pulling our weight globally. I think this sort of bull in a china shop reckless foreign policy of Mr Morrison, which we all know was about trying to win a few votes in the Wentworth by-election, has jeopardised our reputation. People expect Australia to be a sensible middle power in the world, that's what it'll be under a Labor administration. But what we're seeing is nothing to do with foreign policy by Mr Morrison. Mr Morrison thought that if he said we would move the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, a la Donald Trump,  that Jewish Australian voters in Wentworth would love that announcement, and they would rush off and vote for their candidate in the Wentworth by-election. Now none of that happened, and what we've seen is that this reckless and foolish action - and it was, half the Liberal Party will tell you off the record, as I'm sure they have, and so what we now see is a clean-up job. But even the clean-up job, as is so often the case with this Government, they're dragged kicking and screaming and it's too little, too late.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) increasing Newstart, what's the message to delegates about why a review is the preferred option?

SHORTEN: Well I think Newstart is too low. I don't think anyone who says that it needs to increase is wrong. But what we need to do from government is review the level, and understand the implications of increasing Newstart, along with the impact on all of our other taxes and payment systems. We have to look at what we can afford as a nation. But we're not reviewing Newstart to decrease it.

JOURNALIST: What's Labor's position on the Australian Space Agency, have you reached a final position?

SHORTEN: Yes we have. We're quite excited with the decision, we want a national space agency in Australia and we're happy the decision has been made for Adelaide, and Penny Wong and Tony Zappia and Nadia Clancy, Labor's candidate in Boothby, have certainly been very diligent saying Bill we're pleased it's South Australia. So I'm all for it being in South Australia, but I do wish that this Liberal Government nationally, had discovered South Australia before last week. I mean, I wish they'd done more than goad the car industry out of South Australia. We lost 3,000 direct jobs and thousands more indirect jobs. I'm pleased that we're going to get 20 jobs back to South Australia, but it's a real shame we lost thousands.

JOURNALIST: Just on the ALP conference, there's an expectation that you'll resist moves to end offshore processing and turn back boats. But there is a lot of support for increasing the cap on the refugee intake beyond 27,000 and of course putting in place like a new regime for asylum seekers that would be brought over here by other sponsors. Do you support that?

SHORTEN: Labor will debate our policy in the next three days. But if I was to predict everything that would happen today, then there mightn't be a point to have a conference over the next three days. So I want to encourage you to come along Sam. But let's put our approach on boats very clearly. One, we're going to stop the boats and we'll put whatever resources we need to do that. Two, we are supporting regional and offshore processing. But three, we think that refugees are part of our population intake. So we will be taking refugees into this country but we'll do it properly, not via people smugglers. We want to be a good international citizen, we also recognise however that we've got to make sure that whatever policy we adopt we can afford, and that it meets our combined goals of not keeping people in indefinite detention on Manus and Nauru, but also keeping our borders strong so we never again see the people smuggling trade start up, and we see hundreds of innocent people drown at sea merely because they want to come to Australia. Very last question.

JOURNALIST: Just from Darwin, the NT Government, the Labor Government is flat broke despite getting $160 million GST top up. It's spending a lot more money than it is collecting in revenue and GST. Does this mean the Coalition is right and Labor doesn't manage economies?

SHORTEN: Oh no, what it means is that the Northern Territory has been on the receiving end of a downturn from the INPEX hydrocarbon development. I think the Northern Territory has got an exciting future. We're committed to better tourism in Kakadu, we're committed to playing to our strengths in defence in the Northern Territory. Michael Gunner is making significant and well thought out considered decisions about improving access to some gas reserves in the Northern Territory. Palmerston and Darwin are very exciting cities as are Katherine and Tennant Creek, smaller regional communities. There's opportunities in the environment, health care, defence, infrastructure, resources, and of course building on our amazing 60,000 year Indigenous Australian history which makes the Northern Territory one of the luckiest places on the globe. Thanks everybody - I did say last question.

WONG: Can I just finish on a South Australian note. Bill, South Australia was the first State in the Commonwealth to give women the vote, first place in the world where women got the right to stand for parliament and vote. You were introduced by a woman at this press conference, behind us we have Emily Gore, Marielle Smith, and of course Nadia Clancy - great Labor women. And at a time where the Liberal Party has preselected one in four, I think it's pretty clear which party is about modern Australia. Thanks very much.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. We could have had a National Anti-Corruption Commission if the current government had listened to Labor and the Australian people a year ago. I am pleased that the Government is now taking this step towards Labor's plan for an Anti-Corruption Commission, forced to do so by the weight of public opinion. But having reviewed some of the detail of the announcement,  a couple of hours ago, I'm afraid that one can only draw the conclusion that the Government's heart is not in having a fair dinkum Anti-Corruption Commission. It's too little, too late. Mr Morrison's proposal is not a fair dinkum Anti-Corruption Commission, it is too limited in scope, too limited in power, and it has no transparency. I also think that Mr Morrison should explain to the Australian people why he wants to set up a National Anti-Corruption Commission, which curiously exempts himself and the current government from any scrutiny by the new Anti-Corruption Commission. I would like to hand over to Mark Dreyfus, our Shadow Attorney-General, to talk a little further about what's missing from Mr Morrison's too little, too late, not fair dinkum Anti-Corruption Commission.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks very much Bill. You'd have to say that the Morrison Government has been dragged kicking and screaming to this announcement that they've made today. All through this year since Bill Shorten announced our proposal for a National Integrity Commission on the 30th of January, all through this year, we've had Mr Morrison and his colleagues, varying between an outright rejection of the idea, or deriding the idea. So we had the Attorney-General back in May writing to me, saying there was no persuasive evidence for a National Integrity Commission. We had the Prime Minister himself saying this was a “fringe issue” just a matter of weeks ago in the Parliament. We had Christopher Pyne saying on the 19th of November, he said "I don't think that's necessary". So what's changed? Clearly the Government, for some political reason, it thinks it has finally got to announce support, but just like the banking royal commission, they have been dragged kicking and screaming to this idea. Mr Morrison and Mr Porter were at pains to say in their press conference earlier today that they had been working on this for many months. Looking at what they have produced after the months - you have to say it's a pretty thin proposal. What they've done is produce a consultation paper. They're not actually going to do this Integrity Commission, they're simply going to take a commitment to the next election. The detail they're leaving to be worked out. There is actually more detail in what Bill Shorten and I announced back on the 30th of January than what we see from the Government today. What they've announced is a proposal with limited scope, limited, powers and no transparency and, in fact, I would say they've got some explaining to do, just as to why they have decided to produce such a limited form of Integrity Commission.

SHORTEN: Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: How does your model differ?

SHORTEN: Well, I'll get Mark to supplement it. But we put down seven design principles when we announced this a year ago. One is that that we should instead operate as an independent statutory body, the Government has said that, and there should be one commissioner with two deputy commissioners. To be fair, the Government has said that. But, what they haven't said, is that the commission should have a sufficiently broad jurisdiction, that it should have the equivalent powers of a standing royal commission. The Government's not fair dinkum Anti-Corruption Commission has no capacity at all for public hearings, it has no power for the royal commission or the anti-corruption commission to initiate their own investigations. So somewhat unusually, Mr Morrison's Anti-Corruption Commission wouldn’t have been able to have found the Obeid corruption, and indeed many of the New South Wales 11 Liberal MPs who have been punted from Parliament, would not have been caught under Mr Morrison's Commission. But I might get Mark to talk a little bit further of the weaknesses in this body.

DREYFUS: Thanks Bill. Bill's covered some of the deficiencies in what the Government's announced today. I would add that the Government apparently wants to restrict this to criminal conduct only and that is simply not good enough. What we need is a broad overarching integrity commission that is capable of looking at all forms of misconduct, right throughout the Australian public service, through all aspects of government and, again, so that is limited in scope as to what it can investigate. It is also limited in scope, the Government's proposal, as to who it could investigate. It appears that the Government would want to limit this to public servants, it's mentioned contractors but it actually needs to be an Integrity Commission which looks at the whole field of government. It needs to look at everybody who is engaging in corrupt conduct anywhere in our system of government. We would have included and would include, if we are elected and have the opportunity to implement this, the judiciary in a National Integrity Commission. The Government's proposal has limited powers and we think that's not sufficient, as Bill has already mentioned. The Government is proposing that a National Integrity Commission would not have the power to initiate its own inquiries. Effectively, what the Government is saying is that they're going to simply take across all of the existing various single purpose integrity bodies that we have at the Commonwealth level, put them under some kind of overarching commission but not actually add to their powers, not add to their scope and we simply think that's not good enough. I'd end by pointing out that the government has said, Mr Porter made this clear in the press conference this morning, that no public hearings would be held by the proposed National Integrity Commission that the government is putting forward. We think that's simply not good enough. The public of Australia do not want a secret tribunal. What they want is public hearings, not perhaps all the time - in our model, we would leave this to the Commissioner to decide when public hearings were appropriate - but you have to have the capacity to hold public hearings simply to get the educative effect, the anti-corruption effect, of educating the public by holding public hearings. And a point that's often being made by David Ipp, the former commissioner of ICAC in New South Wales, by holding public hearings, you encourage others to come forward with allegations of corruption which is an absolutely vital function to be served by an Integrity Commission

JOURNALIST: So just to clarify that point - are you saying that politicians and their staff should be subjected to public hearings?

SHORTEN: What we've said on public hearings is that whilst the presumption is that they're not, we recognise there is an educative role. I sat down in January with the leading anti-corruption campaigners in Australia, representatives of Transparency International, former judges who've been in charge of successful anti-corruption bodies. They made it clear there has to be some element of public engagement otherwise it won't have the educative effect. Now, we've said we'll consult where that discretion lies but the idea that you can have justice in secret, the idea that the public don't get to actually see the system at all and it's ruled out from day one, damages I think some of the purpose of having an Anti-Corruption Commission. Let's face it - it's a few days before Christmas. Mr Morrison's heart is not in this issue. He said tackling corruption was a "fringe issue" 17 days ago and now has come up with a fringe answer. The fact of the matter is that this is too little, too late. And the very point that it is more limited in scope than the experts say, more limited in powers than the experts recommend and that there is no transparency whatsoever to be continued and the fact that Mr Morrison wants to exempt the conduct of the Liberal Government that he now leads, just speaks volumes of the fact their hearts are not in tackling corruption at the national commonwealth level.

JOURNALIST: Just to be really clear that you're actually - you think that this body should be able to look at past cases as well as future cases of alleged corruption?

SHORTEN: We can see - well, first of all facts occur now which may be relevant to the future. And Mr Morrison has made it very clear that he doesn't want his Government's decisions to be available to the same scrutiny as future governments. This very last minute conversion to some sort of anti-corruption commission doesn't really strike one as being fair dinkum by Mr Morrison. You can see the fingernail marks on the marble of Parliament were he was being dragged kicking and screaming. We said in January, the public need to have greater confidence in Australian politics. We're not saying that we think there is corruption that we're aware of - and if we were, we’d report it. But the point about it is Australians think that too many decisions happen behind closed doors. Other levels of government do have anti-corruption protections. We think we need to update the Commonwealth anti-corruption protections to meet the community standards. A year later, only due to the weight of public opinion - and I acknowledge the work of the public here, just bringing pressure on the Government - Mr Morrison said, well I better have something to say. But the problem is what he's got to say isn't fair dinkum. It's not enough and we've already seen what the third party experts are saying. I think people are pleased that it's being a discussion but the problem is you've got to get the right answer when you admit there's a problem. And again, I'm afraid to say I think the current Government has missed the opportunity to get it right. They know there is a problem. They should actually sit down with Labor and work with us on these issues. I think we can do better in this country and we do it by working together. But this anti-corruption commission needs more power, more scope and the opportunity for some transparency. I think Mr Morrison has to explain why he thinks that his government's conduct should be exempt from any monitoring of an anti-corruption commission.

JOURNALIST: So will Labor support legislation to set up this commission?

SHORTEN: We will and we've said we'll do this in government. We've already outlined our design principles a year ago. It is such a shame that Mr Morrison has such little respect for the Parliament and scrutiny that we're only going to sit for 10 days in the next eight months. And I really regret that Mr Morrison's rushing these announcements out now when he could have told us in Parliament. If he's been working on this for months, what was the crucial idea he designed since Parliament rose which meant that he couldn't raise it back when we were all there together to work on this important reform together?
JOURNALIST: MPs, as you mentioned, will be covered by this new anti-corruption watchdog. Polls show that MPs really don't have the trust of the public or voters for that matter. Do you believe that our current members serving in parliament are corruption free?

SHORTEN: I'm not aware of any corruption full stop. But I mean there's a range of institutions of public life which could afford to do better with the restoration of confidence in the public - the media, institutions of power, wherever. We're doing our bit. Labor's put forward an anti-corruption commission set of design principles. We've been campaigning on it. I do acknowledge that the Government has finally been forced to follow Labor's lead by weight of public opinion. But this proposal that the Government's come up with, it's just not a fair dinkum anti-corruption commission.

JOURNALIST: On another matter, religious freedoms. Are you prepared to pass laws before the next election? Well, we would need to see the laws, wouldn't we? But let's go to the principle behind your question. We support religious freedom, we always have - it's in our platform, the Labor Party platform. It has been in it for many years. So obviously, we'll look at whatever proposal the Government has. But when you use that time period of before the next election, gee it's a shame that the Government sat on this religious freedom review since May. Seven months have passed and now the Government has unfortunately only scheduled 10 days of Parliament in the next eight months - and one of those weeks, three or four of those 10 days will have to be dedicated to the Budget. So I am not sure that Mr Morrison has allowed enough time for us to debate these issues. We will consider the detail but I also must flag that I thought the first cab off the rank, so to speak, was going to be removing discrimination against kids. But unfortunately, Mr Morrison has now proposed a review which on average takes another year. I do - and I also have to say I am worried, if there is any plan by the conservative right of the Liberal Party to make religion an election issue, I think Australians don't want to see religion as an election issue. We will work constructively on the principle of religious freedom but I am concerned if the government or elements of the government -  I should say, have some sort of political desire to make religion a political football in the next election.

JOURNALIST: Are there parts of the government's religious freedoms proposal that you can't support? That you can rule out supporting?

SHORTEN: I think in all fairness, Rachel the government just announced it this morning. Yet again, I just wish the government hadn't sat on this issue for seven months, waited for parliament to rise and then is sort of trying to legislate by press release. Let's sit down and work on this together and I think we can come up with the right answers.

JOURNALIST: Is there a need for the Religious Discrimination Act?
SHORTEN: I have to say when I travel around Australia whilst some people say to me they feel that the role of religion in society is not sufficiently respected, most of the issues I get when I travel around Australia are about, will my kids get an apprenticeship, I can't afford the price of the first home and my kids are locked out of the housing market. Most people tend to raise with me aged care packages and lack of support for older people living with dementia. People raise with me hospital waiting lists for elective surgery. They want to make sure that their child is getting enough resources to get the best possible education. People raise with me about the cuts to penalty rates, people raise with me the spiralling, out of control electricity and gas prices in both households and businesses. There are a lot of issues which are raised with me by Australians. I could not say to you that religion is in the top 100 issues that get raised with me but nonetheless I accept for some people it is a very important matter and it is a principle which the Labor Party supports.

JOURNALIST: Would you pursue any of these recommendations in government or was the report just a waste of time?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I just wish the government had given us the report seven months ago. Why is it that this religious freedom debate has to be weaponised as a source of partisan advantage? I think one of the things which Australians like about Australia is we don't have religion as a big item of argument in our political system. We look at countries around the world where religion is a big argument within politics, I don't think that is the path that Australia wants to go down. I respect the role of faith in people’s lives and I respect the right of people to be able to have religious freedom. Whatever God they worship, or indeed if people worship none, that's fine by me, I am a live and let live person. I get concerned though if we want to see an argument which says that somehow there should be an argument about religion in politics. I don't think that has been the traditional Australian way. Anyway, we will rather than look at the politics or any motivations behind the far right of the Liberal Party pursuing this agenda, let's just deal with the issues and I think we can get to the right outcome.

JOURNALIST: Does Labor support moving the National Space Agency to Adelaide or are you going to stick to your previous policy of keeping it in Canberra?

SHORTEN: Well we certainly want to see jobs go to Adelaide and we are certainly very committed to a space agency. Therefore we will look at the evidence and if it is the right case to move jobs to Adelaide we certainly will. We certainly want to see more done for South Australia and that is why Labor has been such a strong supporter of helping save the steel industry in Whyalla, which will save thousands of jobs. Of helping build the defence capability, defence construction capability in South Australia which will lead to thousands of jobs. And I know the government has a new-found interest in jobs in South Australia but gee it's a shame they let the car industry go on their watch. And I have travelled to Elizabeth which was the home of the car industry in Australia along with Melbourne and gee I hate seeing the people who have lost their jobs there. It is terrible. Anyway, we're certainly up if the Space Agency should be in South Australia and we see the government logic, we're all for that.

JOURNLAIST: The government has committed $41 million to that if you're elected will you honour that commitment?

SHORTEN: Not only will we honour it, we've committed first. But anyway, sometimes in politics if we get the right answer I am not worried whose name is on the proposition. For me, it is about making sure that Australia is part of the technology race of the future. I am very bullish about our investment in science and technology, that's one of the reasons why we want to uncap the number of places for people going to university, it's why we're going to restore proper funding for public TAFE, at the centre of our technical education and of course as a part of that we are not only keen to see the Space Agency be developed, we are keen to make sure that our $100 billion plan for investment in rail over the next two decades is supported and it's why Labor's strongly supporting the bipartisan way our building of our national defence construction capability.
JOURNALIST Are you comfortable with the way suppression orders operate in our legal system?

SHORTEN: I think you're referring to the current debate at the moment which I know has outraged significant parts of the media. I'll leave that for you to argue with the courts. It's a very sensitive matter and I think we are going to see more on that unfold in coming days aren't we?

JOURNALIST: On another issue the midyear economic review MYEFO is due on Monday. What do you want to see in it?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, I would like to see a wages policy from the government. I'd like to see better tax refunds for people who earn less than $120,000 than the government's proposing. I'd like to see greater support for our hospitals and schools. I want to make sure that we see a plan to decrease energy prices. I want to see the battlers get more attention from this government rather than just an ongoing talk about giving tax cuts and tax relief to the big end of town. Thanks, everybody.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody and welcome to St Vincent’s Hospital. Catherine and I have been privileged to see the remarkable staff and the work they are doing, with really strong Australians who are in the battle of their lives. I'd like to acknowledge Cedrick and Caitlin, and Sam and Lois, and the other patients we had the privilege of talking to today, and of course their supportive families. It reminds me indeed of the battles my own mum had when she was diagnosed with breast cancer. She successfully beat cancer and lived for another 18 or so years after the treatment. But it really does bring it home to you, doesn't it? Be it personal or visiting these great patients, there's nothing more than your health. Family and health are the two most issues for people. If you have your health then you can have everything else. But if you or your family members who you love are dealing with health challenges, and of course there is nothing more challenging than cancer and the treatment for that, everything else becomes of secondary importance. And that's why a Labor Government if elected, will prioritise the health care and the proper funding of the health care of Australians. We've outlined our plans and we'll have a lot more to outline before the next election. But I find this morning's announcements by the current Prime Minister insult the intelligence of the Australian people. Do they really think that people in Australia forget that something like $4 billion has been taken out of public hospitals in the last five years of Liberal government? Do they really think that people are going to forget the cuts to health care, the waiting lists for elective surgery, by simply putting back $1 billion? If you take $4 billion out over five years from public hospitals, putting a little bit over $1 billion back doesn't really fill the gap, does it. Labor is committed to outlining election policies which prioritise the health care of all Australians. We've already outlined a commitment to fund our hospitals to an improvement of $2.8 billion dollars in the future, and we'll have more positive policies to announce before the next election. But we just say about today's announcement by the Government: too little, too late. The people of Australia remember the last five years of cuts. Taking out $4 billion from public hospitals and putting just over $1 billion back in the shadow of an election, doesn't really cut it. The Australian people remember the cuts. They want better from their governments and health care. And I'd now like to invite my Shadow spokesperson, Catherine King to outline a bit further about why the government's cuts aren't sorted out today, and indeed some more of our positive propositions for Australia's future.
CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICARE: Thanks very much Bill, and can I thank Angela and Andrew from St Vincent’s here for hosting us today, and taking us through a number of their wards to show the great work that is done here at this hospital, right in the heart of Melbourne. Well this cynical attempt by Scott Morrison to say somehow or other, after five years of cutting $4 billion out of our public hospitals that somehow or other, on the eve of an election, this coming in with a rescue plan is absolute an utter nonsense. This is the record of this government; elective surgery waiting times across the country have gone up under Scott Morrison. More than 270 days people are now waiting for elective surgery across the country and that's gone up by 10 days in the last year alone. A quarter of all patients are not seen by a doctor in emergency in the recommended times; again going up under Scott Morrison. And there is a reason that that has happened - it's happened because this Government has cut $1 billion out of capital in the 2014 Budget, over $200 million out of Labor's hospital reform program which was specifically designed to fund every hospital in the country to improve elective surgery and to improve the emergency department waiting times. And $2.8 billion in activity across every single hospital in the country. And now, Scott Morrison would have you believe that by putting a fraction of that money back in, and making communities bid for that money across the country, that somehow that is going to fix the crisis that he has created in his public hospital system. I was very proud and am very proud that Bill Shorten back in May this year - May this year, announced our $2.8 billion fund to improve hospitals across the country. More money going to every single hospital - not a bidding war across the community to see who can get some of this paltry money the government is putting in. But $2.8 billion for every hospital, for more doctors, for more nurses. You can only trust Labor when it comes to health.

PATIENT: One question please. Does that include physio – out of costs once the patient is discharged from the hospital?

KING: We might take some questions from the media and I'll have a chat to you afterwards as well, but that's very kind of you. So activity, yes it does. So any activity that occurs in hospitals, our fund of course, increases that from 45 per cent to 50 per cent of growth, and that allows hospitals to do much more with the money that they're getting from Labor.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, why should voters believe that Labor would do a better job on health and hospitals than the Coalition?

SHORTEN: Because for five years, we've opposed the cuts of the Liberal Government to the health and hospital system. It's the Liberals who for five years have frozen the patients rebate which they get from visiting the doctor. So we've had five years of Liberal Government and we've seen what they've done. They've cut $4 billion from public hospitals, waiting lists for elective surgery have blown out, and when it comes to a patient going to see a doctor, the rebate they get from seeing the doctor has been frozen. So as the cost of going to see a doctor has gone up, under the Liberals, you end up paying more for your own health care, under Labor, you won't. What we've done by contrast, is we've made serious economic decisions - including making the negative gearing laws fairer, so we can not only prioritise health but we can pay for our promises. It's very straightforward - if you want better hospitals, you vote Labor. If you want to bigger banks, then you vote Liberal. It's all about priorities.

JOURNALIST: What rules need to be in place around that new $1.25 billion health fund?

SHORTEN: Well I'll get Catherine to supplement this, but let's just tell the truth here. The Government has taken billions of dollars out of health care over five years, there's an election within five months. So in the shadow of an election, they've done their research and realised no one trusts the Liberals when it comes to health and hospitals, so they've whistled up a tiny portion of what they've cut, and what they're going to do is engage in a political auction from February of next year to try and buy a few votes. This isn't health care, this is pork barrelling. If you want to have proper health care then one, you put a proper amount of money into the system, which is what Labor will do. And two, you work with the States and Territories. You know, the Federal Government doesn't run a lot of the health system, we provide the funding to the States, to the GPs. What we will do is make sure that we unfreeze Medicare, we'll make sure we put more money into hospitals and we've got more plans to decrease the out of pocket costs for patients in a range of very important medical treatment areas, and we can pay for all of our promises because we're making serious economic decisions. Everyone knows that the government thinks that health care in Australia is a political problem, I actually think that health care in Australia is a matter of families and people. When I was talking to Cedrick who comes in all the way from Berwick with his wife Shelia, when we're talking to Caitlin and her mum, comes in from upper Beaconsfield, when we're talking to Sam who has come in from the Western suburbs of Melbourne to start his treatment - that's why I want to be Prime Minister, so that these people can get better help when it comes to dealing with the big battles in their life. Labor doesn't see health care as a political problem we see it as a priority for Australians to make sure they get - they and their family get the best possible support. Sorry did you want talk a little bit more about this?
KING: No I think you’ve covered it.

SHORTEN: Okay.

JOURNALIST: On the medical evacuations bill why not for the sake of clarity insert a clause that allows a Minister to refuse a transfer on character grounds?

SHORTEN: First of all, if there is a problem with someone seeking treatment to come to Australia because they've got a very serious criminal record, the Minister under our legislation can say no. The government is just – you know, we all know the government is desperate. They're heading into Christmas, people have stopped listening to them, people don't trust them. And what makes me ashamed of what the government is doing at the moment, is are they seriously arguing that someone who could be dying in Nauru shouldn't get treatment in Australia when their doctors recommend it, and the Minister still has the power to stop people on the basis of you know, do they fit into the security laws or will they cause troubles in Australia? You know, where this government is not being fair dinkum with the Australian people is when someone who is getting urgent medical treatment - and there are hundreds in Australia from Nauru, they're still supervised, they don't just get to roam around the country side. So the government is trying to needlessly scare people and the corollary of what this discredited government is saying, is they are saying our boarder security will not be in tact if someone who is very ill can't get medical treatment in Australia. Like why should someone die under our care in Manus and Nauru rather than come to Australia and get treatment, merely so the government can run a political argument. The other thing is if we want to talk about border security - it is shocking that the work of our vessels and our border forces are being cancelled because the price of fuel is too high. What sort of ramshackle outfit is the government running when they say that they are cancelling vessels working up on the North West and the Torres Strait because they can't pay the fuel bills? You know the people smugglers aren't stupid. They see the government every day encouraging them to try their hand to come to Australia for political reasons. You know, the people smugglers will work out - they can read the newspapers like Australians can, they know that this government is cutting staff at airports, they know this government isn't paying the petrol bills for vessels and therefore curtailing the amount of time vessels are spending on the water. The people smugglers know there is a hole in the border security of this country because this current government is so busy fighting Labor they've forgotten to do their day job, which is put petrol in tanks so vessels can go to sea.
JOURNALIST: Was Labor consulted on the new head of Operation Sovereign Borders and if not, would you have liked to have been?

SHORTEN: Listen this government's got to - I don't know if we were consulted I have to say, I suspect not knowing given to form guide of this government. But I just give one note of caution, I don't know if we were but I don't suspect we were. What we're seeing is this government has got an election within five months, and they are literally rushing so many appointments through just to get people in place before the election. I think it would be smarter of the Government to sit down and talk to the Opposition. What people want in Australia is they want more cooperation and less conflict. We're not going to unreasonably withhold our agreement on people who are qualified to do jobs, but I think the government is now rushing appointments. I think it would be better if they sat down and at least spoke to the Opposition. They don't have to give us the right of veto, but I think most Australians expect our politicians to behave like adults, and where there's significant appointments this close to an election, what does it hurt the government to give the Opposition of the day a heads up just to see if there's any real objections. The government can still make the decision I mean, there's too much conflict from this government, not enough cooperation.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten the Transport Workers Union has called for you to allow industry wide bargaining across the aviation industry if you win the next election, is that something you're open to?

SHORTEN: Well, we're heading up to National Conference, there's plenty of people taking plenty of positions. I view this in the context of National Conference, and let me say about that and a whole range of issues which I am seeing reported in elements of the press, this is our 48th National Conference. We've been holding national conferences for the best part of 120 years, we are Australia's oldest continuing political party. What I predict is not what happens on any particular policy, but I predict at the end of this conference there will have been some forceful debate, there will be a lot of passion, a lot of idealism on display, and what we will see at the end of conference is a lot of unity. The Labor Party nationally is the brand for unity in this country, the government by contrast is the brand for disunity in the country at the moment.

JOURNALIST: On the National Conference, would you actually like to see a strong show of support going into the conference, or do you want to have that robust discussion by members?
SHORTEN: I've got no doubt that by the end of the process we will leave the conference for Christmas with good ideas put forward about our values, and a high degree of unity - and I hope a fair bit of debate, we want to have debate. Too much of Australian politics is done behind closed doors. I mean we've got a government who doesn’t even like coming to parliament anymore. You know, they cancel work, they go home early, they've only scheduled - the Morrison Government has scheduled 10 days of parliament in the next eight months. By contrast the Labor Party will have our debates, but I can promise Australians we hear you loud and clear; we won't be talking about ourselves, we will be talking about you. We will be talking about a fair go for all Australians. We'll be talking about making sure we properly fund our hospitals and health care, our schools, our universities, our TAFE and our early childhood education. We will be talking about how we help cost-of-living pressures by putting downward pressure on energy bills, by backing in renewable energy and how we therefore tackle climate change. We'll also be talking about wages policy, because in Australia this Christmas, everything is going up except people's wages, and of course we intend to make the economy work in the interests of all. Wages have flat lined in Australia, the corporate profits have increased six times the increase that wages have by in the last 12 months. It's not good enough.

JOURNALIST: On COAG, how important do you think Indigenous involvement is in setting the new Closing the Gap targets, and do COAG leaders today need to pledge to work with Aboriginal groups in the process?

SHORTEN: After 230 years of not listening to our First Australians, I think the time has well and truly arrived that we consult with our First Australians about decisions which affect them. It’s why we support a Voice to Parliament. I know some of the Labor Premiers have been very good at sitting down and working with First Australians. I say to every other Australian, First Australians don't want a special deal, they just want to enjoy some of the same outcomes which all Australians enjoy in health, and education and employment. I think, and this is the way I'd be if I was Prime Minister, you get a lot more out of this country and the Australian people when you sit down and work with them, rather than lecture them and dictate at them. That's how we will be, not only with our First Australians, but we'll bring employers and workers together, we want to bring together the whole health sector, all the professionals, the front line people, the researchers, the experts, and of course health consumers. This country works best when we work together and that's what we want to see across a whole range of our policies, and I think the national mood going into 2019 is enough of the conflict. Enough of Liberal/Labor all hate each other and they don't seem to talk about the people. We are here today because we want to see health care properly funded. That's what the people tell us and that's what we will do.

JOURNALIST: If I could take you back to Operation Sovereign Borders? Would Labor actually make any changes in regards to that, and if so do you see any reform for improvement or perhaps a review?

SHORTEN: I will tell you what Labor will do, we will make sure there is enough money in the bank account to pay for the petrol, to make sure our vessels are on the sea. We will make sure that there's enough overtime to pay the border force to do the work for Christmas, to make sure we monitor people coming from the airports. Politics isn't that complicated, you make your decisions, you make your priorities and you stick to them. What we don't want is government cuts to border security, undermining border security and putting all the blame therefore, back onto the Opposition. If I'm in charge, there will be enough money to make sure there is petrol in the ships to go to sea.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible questions)

SHORTEN: I'll come back to you in a sec. We said we’d have a chat to you especially.

JOURNALIST: Would you increase the Operation Sovereign Borders budget then, is that what you saying?

SHORTEN: We will do what it takes to keep our borders secure. If it is necessary to (inaudible) more vessels, we will. But I put the Government on notice today. Don't start encouraging the people smugglers to start before an election just to win a tawdry political argument, and don't for goodness sake, reduce the amount of time vessels are spending on the water. Don't for goodness sakes, reduce the number of staff who are working at our airports. Australians have a right to know that when they pay their taxes to Canberra, they are being spent on the priorities of the people, not just political point scoring.

JOURNALIST: On the medical transfers bill, would it only apply to the current cohort on Nauru and Manus or would it also apply to future illegal arrivals who might be sent to those places?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we've got an issue around the current cohort. And again, what we're proposing with the medical transfer bill, I don't think is a great departure from what already happens. What it's doing is it's putting down on paper what has been happening in a de facto manner already. I do think if treating doctors says a very sick person needs to come to Australia, someone who is in Australia’s care, whilst the Minister has got the discretion, we have got to make sure that we are using the power of government in a transparent and fair manner. Again, all we're doing in my opinion is helping codify what has been happening in an existing manner and making sure that it's transparent and fair to all, and transparent to the Australian people.

JOURNALIST: So for example, if 100 people arrived on a boat tomorrow and they all asked for transfers on medical grounds. How would that work and how would you vet them for security purposes in 24 hours?

SHORTEN: Sorry, I think you know that whoever has ever texted you that hypothetical question - let's be clear. First of all, the Government says boats aren't coming under their watch, so he it couldn't happen, could it? The only way your question becomes a live question is if the Government drops the ball. We will take everything on a case by case basis, but let's go to the fundamentals which is underpinning your question Rachel, which is this. We will turn back boats where it is safe to do so. We are committed to offshore processing. We are committed to regional re-settlement. But what I can't do is say that if someone is dying on Nauru, refuse them treatment in Australia in a supervised fashion, where the Minister deems after seeing the evidence that it's appropriate to do so. A bit of common sense has got to emerge here, doesn't it?

JOURNALIST: The Government says someone in offshore detention who refuses medical services to worsen their condition would be eligible to come to Australia under this Bill. Why couldn't that happen?

SHORTEN: Do you know, I wish the Government hadn't cancelled Parliament and we could’ve debate these issues in the House of Reps. Isn't it funny, the Government can bombard by text message, but they are too frightened to debate the issues in the Parliament. I've got nothing further to add to what I've said earlier. We will turn the boats around where it's safe to do so. We're absolutely committed to regional resettlement and offshore processing. But what I'm not going to do is reduce this debate to the absurd proposition that we would rather let people die on Nauru than treat them in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton says that there are no other third countries to send asylum seekers -

SHORTEN: Listen, Peter Dutton said he had the numbers to become Prime Minister, he tore down Malcolm Turnbull and he wrecked the Liberal Party. When Mr Dutton's own party don't vote for him, don't listen to him, I think I might take that advise, too.

JOURNALIST: So with that being said though, is there any scope there to resettle people to third countries?

SHORTEN: Listen, I don't think the government has tried enough. New Zealand offered to take people. We congratulate the Government on the work they've done with the American deal. It is as simple as this. We can have strong borders, but that doesn't mean you keep people in indefinite detention on Manus and Nauru because the government of the day is too lazy to negotiate resettlement arrangements with other countries. Just because the Government has failed, doesn't mean we should accept their failure as our benchmark.

JOURNALIST: What legal advice do you have that ASIO security clauses would prevent criminals or accused criminals coming to Australia if their offending isn't at the higher end?

SHORTEN: We are getting advice, the point about it all is though is that all we've done with the medical transfers arrangement is strengthen the existing rules to make sure that we include specific reference to ASIO. The Minister still has the power to say no, given all the facts, but what we don't want to do is see our medical treatment advice just simply ignored. All good? Thank you very much. See you, everyone. E&OE TRANSCRIPT
DOORSTOP
WHYALLA
MONDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2018

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. It's great to be here with Sanjeev Gupta, founder and leader of the GFG Alliance which is going to save the Whyalla steel industry, and indeed, I think provide a bright future for Australian steel. It's an absolutely fantastic announcement for the workforce, for the families, for the residents of Whyalla, for the small businesses and all the other people who do rely on a successful Whyalla steel industry. What's really exciting is that today, for the first time in a generation or more, we've seen a vision outlined that Australia can compete in the steel making industry and be amongst the best steel makers in the world. What we see today is a bold vision which will save jobs in regional Australia, which will grow jobs in regional Australia, by providing heavy industry and renewable energy. What this visionary plan for the future of Whyalla and steel making in Australia shows, is that having a good economy and having a good environment are not in competition, they are actually in cooperation. I want Australia to be a country that continues to make things. I think we're long past the day where we should just be the nation's quarry, digging up our raw materials, shipping them overseas and then paying a lot more to buy them back. Australian workers, Australian innovation are amongst the best in the world. We've got some of the best natural resources in the world and what's exciting is that we're hearing a plan for the long term. The big challenge in Australia is not just thinking about the short term of the five and 10 and 20 year horizon. Labor congratulates Sanjeev Gupta and all of the workforce of Whyalla, and in saying that I must commend the workforce. This company was on its knees two years ago and more. It was a real 50-50 decision would this company go ahead. But what happened is the workforce took the long-term view that it was better to have some short-term pay cuts and restructure of their shift rosters, so long as there could be light at the end of the tunnel which was jobs for their kids in the future. This workforce and the unions in cooperation with the far side of management, have today offered the best and brightest promise for Whyalla in many, many decades. It's an example of how Australia can cooperate; heavy industry and renewable, workers and management, export based manufacturing, Australia being a country that doesn't just dig things up, but makes things here and competes with the world. I'd now like to invite the CEO, Sanjeev Gupta who has absolutely got everyone pretty excited about the future of Whyalla and to hear some more of the vision which he outlined earlier today.

SANJEEVE GUPTA, CEO: Thanks, I think I've spoken enough. I'll just take questions if you have some.

JOURNALIST: Mr Gupta, is there going to be a big emphasis on using Australian steel to do the projects you outlined?

GUPTA: Actually, it's - that is already a point well supported, support I will continue. Most government projects, most construction, first of all gets that and the other point is it's also a natural phenomenon anyway. Even when Arrium went into administration, even during that long period, 70-80 per cent of the steel used in the company was produced by Whyalla. So the customers, the construction industry, everybody needs a local producer. People think you can just import steel, it's not that easy, it's not about - it is about competitiveness but it's also about the whole supply chain as well. I just think it's not that simple. You have to have a look at producing, you have to look at supply just in time, make modifications, change things as things are being built. You can't have six months, nine month long supply chains, it's just doesn't work like that, you don't build a country like that.

JOURNALIST: Mr Gupta when it comes to the next generation plant, have you got a ballpark figure of how much that might cost you?

GUPTA: I honestly do, but I wouldn't like to start speculating on those things until we've actually finalised it. We've done quite a lot of work on it. Already all the pieces of the work are done. Now we commissioned, signed today of the detailed (inaudible) - that will cost tens of millions, and if you go over the next six to nine months and that will be time (inaudible).

JOURNALIST: Mr Gupta, a next-generation steel pipe modellings are different to the current generation of steel pipe. What are the key ingredients that make it what you want to build in the future?

GUPTA: I mean look, I love my current steel plants, I don't want to talk it down but there is - we are talking about having another - a new steel plant especially scale steel plant of - a 10 million tonne steel plant, all the latest technology, it will be much, much, much bigger blast furnaces, economies of scale, it will use ARVR, it will use machine learning, it will use everything you can think of in terms of the modern industrial era. All of those things and beyond. Nobody has built a 10-20 million tonne steel plant for a while. So the fact that we will do this now will be, it will be the best in the world. Our steel plant, the existing steel plant is tired, it is old. It hasn't been invested in for a long time. We are doing some of that. But really, fundamentally to do it at that scale we need a new steel plant, as well as trying to fix the current one.

JOURNALIST: The stuff down the foreshore that was announced, the horticulture projects, those types of projects - obviously you're not directly involved but I am guessing it is something you're really appreciated that is going to happen as well?

GUPTA: I am very passionate about it because you know, you can't have a steel town, you have to have a town, a city which has a proper ecosystem, it is a diverse, it has the full mix of everything. So bringing other industry here is critical for the success, even of the steel plant. So I am very passionate about inviting as many other industries as possible here. The other point is, as you know, we are building our renewable park. So once that 1,000 megawatts is built, we are not going to use all of it, we are very keen for other industries to come utilise that power.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

GUPTA: Next summer is what the target is. I don't know if we will make it but that's the target for that one.

JOURNALIST: I am sure this is will be part of the feasibility study, but for the next generation plant, are you going to be able to source enough water for that?

GUPTA: Yeah, that is part. All the work which is going on, obviously that is a critical part. There will need a different scale solution to that. But I want to talk a bit more about the - I think all the attention is going to next-gen as you would expect because that is where all the excitement is. But we are talking about spending $1.3 billion on the transformation. That you know, by itself is a mammoth undertaking which has never happened in this place for a very, very long time, and that will make that businesses sustainable. Things like this state-of-the-art (inaudible) will make that business for sustainable for the long term. The next-gen is very exciting and it is the future, but right now what we need to focus on over the next couple of years is actually the transformation program which is what will keep this business going, which is what we are running now.

JOURNALIST: Do you expect to grow your workforce as part of the transformation program or expect it to maintain -

GUPTA: Yes. So the big growth will be in the construction jobs, and then after that, there is a lot of automation in it so there will be increases for sure. But there are not going to be thousands of people, more like hundreds of jobs in terms of sustainable job increases on the current transformation. Obviously the next-gen is a different ball game all together.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

GUPTA: Actually, we were talking earlier and I said for me today, it is actually the - not the day we bought the business, not the first anniversary - today is the greatest moment because it is all that work over the last 15 months. Thousands and thousands of man hours, tens of millions of dollars which has gone into the feasibilities now resulting in these two contracts, the mill and the (inaudible) plant, with more to come. This is about half the project if you like and out of the $1.3 billion about 600 has been committed today, there is 700 to go which will be finalised also over the next few weeks and month.

JOURNALIST: Opposition Leader, can I ask you a question?

SHORTEN: You've finished on the steel projects? Because Mr Gupta doesn't have to worry about federal politics. I should have also introduced Eddie Hughes. He is the Whyalla Member here, the State Member. He is third generation Whyalla steel works – indeed his own son came out of his apprenticeship when Arrium had the shadow over the administration. So I'll just finish up on the steel plant to say, what we see here today is an investment in manufacturing. Steel jobs are good jobs because they pay well, they are permanent jobs; you can get a mortgage, you can make financial decisions. I am very optimistic that if across regional Australia, we unlock the key of renewable energy to power manufacturing, we can make sure we stop the exodus to the big cities of our young population out of the bush and the regions. Anyway, over to the other issues.

JOURNALIST: Newspoll, I am guessing you must be buoyed by today's numbers?

SHORTEN: Well, for five and a half years I have made a habit of not commenting about the polls. Sometimes they're good and sometimes they're not so good, so I don't comment about the polls. I think you should ask though, Mr Morrison the Prime Minister and his Liberal team what they think about that.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton says his advice on the Nauru bill is that asylum seekers with serious criminal records will be able to come to Australia and there'll be no power to intervene. Is that contrary to your advice?

SHORTEN: Yes, it is. Listen, let's go to the heart of the matter here. Labor is committed to turning back boats. We are committed to offshore processing. But what does the Government want? If someone is sick and dying on Nauru, do they just expect us to leave them there? We've had hundreds of people come to Australia now for medical treatment, literally hundreds. The six kids or the 10 kids left on Nauru - is the Government really arguing that border security now will be affected, when in fact they've been bringing hundreds of people here, and all we've proposed is that treating doctors' views get taken seriously. The Minister still has discretion, the Minister still has the final say. But what we do think is that where you've got treating medicos, I don't want people just to be left on Nauru to die just because the Government doesn't want to treat them in Australia and then send them back to Nauru.

JOURNALIST: So will you release your advice on this policy?

SHORTEN: Listen, it's existing policy. This Government, you know they've really got to explain what is wrong with having two treating doctors with the Minister still having final discretion. Full stop. I mean really, we got down to a debate in Australian politics that an Australian Government saying it's better to leave someone on Nauru to die than bring them to Australia, in custody, have treatment, and send them back to Nauru.

JOURNALIST: How do you stand up to the left of the party and any push they may have to try and soften the current border protection policy?

SHORTEN: See the irony - the previous question was that we're not doing enough on border security and then the next question is we're doing too much, and we're not even the government. We'll have our National Conference; I am determined that the people smugglers don't get back into business. I think it is to the disgrace - to the shame in fact, of the Federal Government, that every day when they have a microphone in front of them they just signal to the criminal gangs in South East Asia - try your hand for bringing people to Australia. That is the exact opposite of what a government should be doing. We will work as the government has to maintain strong borders; turning boats back where it is safe to do so; we are committed to regional processing, full stop. But what I also believe is that, after five-plus years, this government should have done more to resettle people elsewhere around the world than they have, and that's what we'll do. So for National Conference, I am confident that the party understands the position I've outlined, and that is the policy I'll be taking to the next election.

JOURNALIST: Just briefly back on Mr Dutton, what do you make of his comments Tanya Plibersek is unfit to sit on the National Security Committee?

SHORTEN: What did he say about Tanya?

JOURNALIST: That she was unfit to sit on the National Security Committee because ((inaudible).

SHORTEN: Well one, she will. And two, if Peter Dutton wants to make the election a test of his character versus Tanya Plibersek's, bring it on. She is an outstanding person. All good?

JOURNALIST: I just want to ask Eddie a question. Eddie, steel is in your blood. How are you feeling today with the huge announcements for the steel works?

EDDIE HUGHES, STATE MEMBER FOR GILES: Delighted. The community since Sanjeev bought in, confidence is buoyed. But we were in a state of limbo, wondering what was going to happen next. But now we have something incredibly tangible. This is like an incredible Christmas present for the community that's been unwrapped today. In the meantime we have a very strong future. The steel transformation plan is incredibly visionary and ambitious, but before that we're going to have a lot of solid work that's going to mean massive investment in our community and jobs sustained into the future. So it is a real solid Christmas present for my community.

SHORTEN: Thanks, everybody.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. I just thought as it's the end of the Parliamentary year, I just wanted to say thank you to the Press Gallery for the work that they have done this year. Also, to make a few brief comments on Labor's year this year. Labor has had a positive year. We have been a strong Opposition, but I believe we're emerging as an alternative government. Labor's led the debate this year about the establishment of a National Integrity Commission to restore the faith of the Australian people in our political process. We have seen the work of Labor's Banking Royal Commission conducted this year, and that has revealed the shocking depth and the malaise within our banking sector and the treatment of customers, small businesses, farmers, individuals and families. Labor's outlined strong policies to create universal child care for all 3 and 4-year-olds in Australia. We've articulated a bipartisan energy policy, adopting, in part, former Prime Minister Turnbull's National Energy Guarantee and, of course, committing to a 50 per cent renewables by 2030, and the rollout of solar batteries to make sure that the 2 million households who have solar panels and other Australian households who would like to access renewable energy have an easier path to do so. Labor's outlined our commitment to an independent foreign policy. A foreign policy with an Australian accent. We have also outlined a range of other policies about reversing cuts to schools and hospitals. By contrast the Government this year has reached peak division. They have lost a Prime Minister and a Deputy Prime Minister, a Foreign Minister. They are racked by division. This Government is famous for its cuts and its chaos and its division. It lurches from embarrassment to embarrassment, scandal to scandal, chaos to chaos. Last night, I formed the view that the Parliamentary year shouldn't end on a note where there was no sensible conclusion to a national security matter. The Prime Minister ran away from Parliament. It was all too hard. He said, "well, we will sort this out next year." Now, I understand in the Parliamentary process there can be debate between the Senate and the House of Representatives, the need to improve legislation. The people of Australia, though, often don't have time for what they perceive to be games. I thought it was important that we reach at least sensible conclusion before the summer on the important matter of national security. We will seek to improve the legislation in the New Year, there are legitimate concerns about the encryption legislation. But I wasn't prepared to walk away from my job and leave matters in a stand-off and expose Australians to increased risk in terms of national security. So, Labor has shown leadership this year, we've shown unity. My team is united. My team is outlining policies for the future and alternative government. In contrast, the Government is marked by division and chaos. Happy to take some questions this morning.

JOURNALIST: So when did you change your mind on encryption, because it must have been pretty late?

SHORTEN: Well, as you know, the Government tabled this encryption legislation and their proposed amendments and the Parliamentary committee report the day before yesterday. So, in the course of the late afternoon, once the Government just simply gave up, once the Government ran away from the Parliament, at that point I thought we need to get to a sensible conclusion. Frankly, I was surprised that the Government just ran away. Hardly ever in the history of Australia has there been a government so desperate not to turn up to Parliament. So, once they had done that, we needed to draw matters to, I think, a sensible compromise. And I acknowledge the work there of our Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator Penny Wong, and Senator Mathias Cormann.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you that the Government will amend the legislation in February? There was some, I guess, a little wish-washy language they put out last night about agreeing to consider the amendments in February. Will they actually legislate the amendments in February?

SHORTEN: I don't agree with your characterisation that Senator Cormann's language was -

JOURNALIST: Christian Porter's said he was going to, they would consider the amendments -

SHORTEN: Sorry, if I can just answer your first observation.

JOURNALIST: If the encryption laws were bad, Anthony Albanese left last night, said they were terrible laws, wouldn't the right thing to do be to stick to your guns and fight them and hold out for these amendments? I mean, these laws aren't going to come into place over Christmas, there's no real urgency.

SHORTEN: Well, let's be very, very clear here. I think the laws were rushed. It was Labor doing the work at the public hearings, with I have to say government members of the Parliamentary Committee who investigated the legislation. This Government sought to, I think, initially use these national security laws to try and get an angle or an argument with Labor. Anyway, the Parliamentarians did the work. It was a unanimous report to improve and update the legislation. What we recognise is because the Government just simply left the building, and ran away from Parliament that we didn't want to see this matter not have any conclusion and just leave it all in a vacuum over the summer. But I acknowledge that Senator Cormann and Senator Wong were able to say that the amendments we wanted yesterday, we will do them in the first week back, consistent with what a bipartisan committee's recommended. It is not a perfect solution and to all of those who are concerned about the economic impact of this legislation, we hear you. And we've said that we want to review it. But in the meantime, I think Australians are over the games and people standing in two different corners yelling at each other and throwing rocks and insults. I will take half a win and move forward than simply continue this sort of angry shouting, which I think does mark - I think you'd all agree - the Government's conduct.

JOURNALIST: I just want to go to the migration law amendement -

SHORTEN: Sorry, you go then you go.

JOURNALIST: So that's going to come up again in February?

SHORTEN: Yes.

JOURNALIST: And should it go through the House of Representatives? Do you think that will be a trigger for, or do you think it should be a trigger for the Morrison Government to call an early election?

SHORTEN: Well, this is the problem with Mr Morrison running away from Parliament. He's deferred the issues. He hasn't solved anything. He is a Parliamentarian. Part of that means in your title you turn up to Parliament. The real problem is that this is the Government. In fact, if you strip away a lot of the individual policy arguments yesterday, the biggest problem - the biggest disagreement that Labor has with the Government - is that the Government don't want to turn up to Parliament. And when they are afraid of a particular outcome through the Parliamentary process, they shut Parliament down. So, no, Mr Morrison's got all problems that he had yesterday, which he ran away from - they will still be there in February. But in the meantime, we took a view to have a sensible conclusion to at least one matter, and move forward. I mean, the real issue here is that every time you see Scott Morrison speaking, he's talking about Bill Shorten. The public don't really care what he thinks about me. The public want the know what the Government is going to do for the country, what they are going to do for the challenges of Australian families. We got some pretty disappointing economic numbers this week. It shows that economic growth is stalling, wages - wages growth is stalled. Economic growth is slowing. We're seeing access to credit harder, we are seeing living standards actually dropping, and we're seeing Australian households having to dip into their savings just to pay the weekly bills. These are the real challenges, but Mr Morrison would much rather attack the Opposition than talk about the people of Australia.

JOURNALIST: But back on the Bill Mr Shorten, you spent five years trying to ensure that there wasn't even a chink of light between you and the Government on issues of border protection, national security.Why have you opened up a potential fight on this front with the Government? Is it the pressures of the ALP National Conference?

SHORTEN: No. First of all, just to set the record straight over the last five years, when it's come to national security legislation - it is correct, I managed to work with Tony Abbott, I managed to work with Malcolm Turnbull. But in the process, in something between 12 and 15 national security laws that the Government moved, we made over 150 changes. So what we've done as a conscientious Opposition is we have the goal of keeping Australians safe and working wherever we can with the Government, but I think a fair minded observer like yourself would acknowledge that what we've managed to do is civilised and make sensible, rushed government security legislation. In terms of our borders, we will turn back boats where it is safe to do so. We will still keep offshore processing full stop. But if Mr Morrison is trying to argue that the only way you have borders, protections, is not to provide timely medical treatment to some asylum seekers on Manus and Nauru, that's rubbish. I mean under this Government, they have had hundreds of people come from Manus and Nauru for medical treatment. But somehow when Labor and the Crossbench proposed some rules around it, this became an unacceptable attack on our borders. That's rubbish. You know it, I know it, possibly Mr Morrison knows this.

JOURNALIST: It's okay, the public details on that asylum seeker policy obviously Scott Morrison is lining you up for a campaign debate about asylum seeker policy, says you're going to weaken the borders so what are Labor’s principles now, how long should people stay in detention if five years is too long and should all those children come off Nauru now?

SHORTEN: Well, our principles are that we want to make sure that the people smuggler trade doesn't start again. And I say to those people who just think we should take anyone who comes here by boat, who arrives by boat, that's not a safe system. And we do not want to see people drown at sea exploited, vulnerable people, exploited by people smugglers and criminal syndicates. That's why I find so reprehensible the Government constantly putting a billboard up to criminal syndicates in South-East Asia saying that if Labor is elected they should try their hand again. That is dangerous and reckless conduct and the Government should be ashamed of themselves. But going to the other point, the other balancing point is that if we have regional processing, which Labor supports, I think most Australians agree with me that five years is too long. So what we will do is actively negotiate resettlement arrangements. I do not understand for the life of me why Mr Morrison and the Government were happy to resettle people in the United States but not New Zealand. So I do think that the - it is not an automatic correlation that you can only deter people smugglers by keeping people in indefinite detention. That is not the Australian way.

JOURNALIST: On two points if I could, what's Labor’s limit, how long is enough? Is it two years, is it a year, and the children will they all come off, should they all go off?
SHORTEN: Sorry  you did ask that other point, I beg your pardon. In terms of timing what I will do if we are elected is prioritise resettlement. I am optimistic that it won't take five years. I'm not the Government -

JOURNALIST: Another five years -

SHORTEN: Just hang on, I'm just answering Mark's question. I am confident if we form a government, we can resettle people who are in resettlement facilities in Manus and Nauru in a much more timely fashion than the Government. But what I can't do, when we're not the Government is predict the outcome of individual nation to nation negotiations until we are the Government. So I can't put a time on it but what I can say is I wouldn't leave people waiting for five years - to me, it's a priority. In terms of children where they require medical treatment and where two doctors, two treating medical professionals say that the treatment is necessary in Australia, we think that should be taken very seriously. Now of course, we still say the Minister should resolve and retain ultimate discretion, in terms of security or other matters, but at the end of the day, all we are saying is let's exercise some common sense and some compassion for kids, or indeed, other people requiring medical treatment which is not available there, which is available in Australia, which is the advice of treating doctors. I'm not going to start pretending as a politician that I'm a better doctor than the treating doctors. Michael was next.

JOURNALIST: Should people who are brought here for medical reasons, will you maintain the Government's hard line that they never be permanently resettled in Australia?

SHORTEN: Yeah, we want to resettle people overseas. And what we have got to do is make sure the people smugglers can't sell their crooked and wicked - you know, promise and exploitation of vulnerable people by saying, "if you get on an unsafe vessel that it will be happy so long as you get to Australia." That is the path which has led to drownings at sea. At the end of the day, I do think we should take refugees in this country, but we have got to make sure that we don't have a policy which is actually dangerous to people.


JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you made the point that the Bill has just been deferred, Scott Morrison as just put it off he hasn't solved it. Historically, in 1929, 1941 when a Government loses a Bill like this Stanley Melbourne Bruce and Arthur Fadden went to the Governor General the next day. Is that the way that you would interpret this kind of loss?

SHORTEN: It's a serious matter but it's not a matter of confidence or supply. In other words, voting for this legislation doesn't stop the functioning of government. The old age pension still gets paid, our troops are still there, you know, the business of government still carries on and the business of the nation. It is a serious matter but perhaps another way rather than the Government looking at some sort of apocalyptic Armageddon, maybe we shouldn't burden kids on Nauru with being responsible for the fate of the Australian Government. Maybe what they should do instead is just vote for the legislation. Sorry, I did say you were next sorry.

JOURNALIST: Thanks Mr Shorten. You mentioned the economy is slowing. What date would Labor’s proposed changes to negative gearing and capital gains tax take effect from and will it partly depend on the state of the economy and the housing market?

SHORTEN: I will go to the second part of your question first. We're committed to reforming negative gearing. You know, we've had our policy out for three years. I just don't see it as fair that first home buyers - you know, perhaps people in their late 20s or early 30s - go along to bid at an auction against someone who's getting a taxpayer subsidy. That's not fair. I see the Government again and some of the vested interests saying it's terrible policy. We have said that for the people who currently invest under the existing tax laws, that won't change. So, at a point after the election before our first budget or at our first budget that will change we haven't picked the final timing of that. But for us, our policy about the Australian dream of owning your first home, that's what is driving us. The Government says it's going to be terrible for the housing market, what is difficult for housing prices at the moment is banks restricting loans. We're not in, we're not in power. So, when I watch the Government running around like Chicken Little saying the sky will fall in - give us a break. I actually think they should talk to parents and grandparents who have got adult kids who turn up to an auction on Saturday, they get the deposit together and it is just out of range. And why should Australians whose are paying taxes, pay taxes to subsidise someone else competing unfairly for the chance to get their first home?

JOURNALIST: Just on some unfinished business, discrimination against gay students and teachers.

SHORTEN: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Do you see that now as an election issue? Or do you commit to working with the Government in those two sitting weeks in February to deal with that and on a related note, are you still banking on a May election or are you war gaming with the possibility that the Parliament might not return next year?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I don't think the issue of removing an exemption against discriminating against kids or, indeed, Australians should be an election issue. We should just remove the exemption which authorises discrimination against kids. Now, I said that this is a vexed issue, I actually think, as my Deputy Leader said - Tanya Plibersek, the solution is simple. I accept, though that are people in religious educational institutions who are not sure how it would work. I just want to say, to most of the religious schools that I'm aware of, don't use an exemption to allow them to discriminate against kids or, indeed, staff. I would like to resolve it in the first two weeks. In fact, the only two weeks that this Parliament's allowing before an election. And we should work together. But we are determined to be a country that doesn't authorise discrimination. I think most people agree with me on that. In terms of when the Government is going to call an election, or come back, I don't know. It’s very hard to keep them here. They don't like to turn up and they're afraid of coming to Parliament.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on Emma Husar, as Labor leader, you've got enormous powers of persuasion and authority -

SHORTEN: Thank you.

JOURNALIST: You're welcome. Would you use that to save Emma Husar's political career?

SHORTEN: Well, I said at the time when Emma wrote saying she wasn't going to re-contest the election, that I felt that was the right decision then both for her and the Party and I haven't changed my mind.

JOURNALIST: She says she wants to continue her career.

SHORTEN: I understand that but I haven't changed my mind.

JOURNALIST: So if she runs as an independent, you will be mightily cross?

SHORTEN: No, I'm not about to start judging Emma at all. She has said she was launching some legal proceedings. I said at the time when she was the subject of some attacks that I wasn't going to add to any media controversy and I'm going to practice that rule.

JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce has renewed his calls to have MPs allowed to hire their spouses. Do you think that passes the pub test or is that something you would consider?

SHORTEN: I don't know about the pub test, but Labor has no plans to change the existing policies.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are you concerned about the appointments to the Fair Work Commission by Ms O'Dwyer?

SHORTEN: I think it is disgusting. This is a government who's appointing six deputy presidents today or - did they do it today or yesterday? This is institutional stacking. Each of these positions carries with it an emolument, I suspect, of half a million dollars. So what the Government is doing is putting six employer reps, giving them each half a million dollars of taxpayer money until what – the age of when they're 70 or 75? I mean, what crass conduct by this Government. They've actually appointed, in this independent umpire, 20 people in a row with employer backgrounds. Like, they are tainting the Commission, they are stacking it with mates. Where is the big crisis that - I don't think that there was a big jobs vacancies for deputy presidents of the Fair Work Commission. This is a government who can't sort out people's penalty rates, they can't sort out a range of issues to do with workers' conditions but they're going to find no less than six people and make them deputy presidents and give them jobs for life. And one reason why they're doing it? Because they're panicking they might lose the next election. This is not the way to run a nation.

JOURNALIST: I just want to ask about Border Force, budget cuts is the story today that budget cuts are causing Border Force to lay off staff at airports over Christmas and perhaps suspend boats that are patrolling northern Australia. Insiders are saying that's a threat to border security. Can I just get your response to that? Do you think this is a threat to border security?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I did read this story that the Australian Border Force is cutting, slashing staffing numbers. I don't know what this Government is on - they can find money for six deputy presidents to do a job which would be lucky to take them through to morning tea time, but yet we do have to maintain border security. I don't think Australians are going to thank Mr Morrison this summer, when they've got to wait in long queues to get processed at airports. The last thing Australians want to do is spend a long time in airport queues because Mr Morrison is cutting the numbers for safety, and the other thing of course, it jeopardises safety. You can't visit parliament without tripping over a Coalition minister shrieking about national security but when it actually comes to walking the walk, rather than just talking the talk, they're cutting job numbers - very reckless conduct.

JOURNALIST: Yesterday, the Prime Minister said you were a clear and present risk to Australian safety. He is obviously trying to drag you into a bare knuckle brawl in the coming campaign. How are you going to approach that?

SHORTEN: Every time you see Scott Morrison on his feet, he talks about me. Every time you see the Coalition talking in Parliament, they're talking about me. In Question Time this year, they personally referred to me 1,260 times. I don't know what they would do if they couldn't talk about me. But the more serious problem is that the Australian people don't really care what Mr Morrison thinks about me - they want to know what he is going to do for the country. They want to know what he is going to do for them. So my strategy - when they go low, is we'll go high. My strategy is when they go negative, we will talk about the issues which are affecting Australian people. We will reverse the cuts to hospitals, we will properly fund our schools, we will provide universal access for 3 year olds. We'll put more money back into our system to make sure that we have a properly funded university and TAFE sector. We will absolutely make sure that we put downward pressure on energy prices. One, by the cunning strategy of having an energy policy, and two, by backing renewables and new technologies. We are working and we will be working very hard at our national conference and into next year, to have a positive vision for this country. People say to me as I travel around Australia, with the Government's disunity and chaos, "Gee, your job's easy, just go on a cruise or something." Well, actually, the pressure is quite different. People are looking to Labor as possibly an alternative government. For the first time in a generation, Liberal voters are actually thinking of voting for Labor. What I want to be is reaffirm the trust of millions of people who just want a government to do their day job. We will turn up to parliament, we are not afraid to come here, we will work on positive policies. And every time you see Mr Morrison talking about me, talking about Bill Shorten, he is not talking about you, the Australian people. I won't fall into that trap. Thanks, everybody, that has been great to catch up with you all and let me just -  oh well, you have had a promotion, ok, alright - one go, sorry! But you can't say that I ignore on you any other occasion now. A little Christmas present!

JOURNALIST: You started by saying that the Opposition is emerging as an alternative government. Do you really think you are only emerging - the election is just around the corner?

SHORTEN: I think we're ready for whenever the election is called. I understand that people have looked at the end of this parliamentary year and said, "what a shower, what are these people doing." Well, last night, I decided to make what I think was a sensible resolution to at least one issue. We're ready to come back next year, we're going to do it with positive policies, we have been doing that hard work. At the start of this discussion, I outlined our wins on a banking royal commission, putting on the table a National Integrity Commission. But what we will do next year is come back refreshed. But I just want to promise the Australian people - I get it, I hear you, less about us, more about you. Thank you, everybody, and Merry Christmas.

SUBJECT: National security
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good evening everybody. Today we've seen perhaps the most irresponsible abandonment of national security lawmaking that I've seen in my time in Parliament. Today, because the Government and the Prime Minister didn't want to lose a vote about getting children off Nauru for medical treatment, they abandoned the national security laws of Australia, and as a result, abandoned their obligations to keeping Australians safer. What's happened today, and I'll take a brief moment to explain because I think Australians are legitimately frustrated at the conduct of the Parliament, is this. A majority of the Senate wanted to introduce a law which will ensure that sick children on Nauru have transparent decision making guided by their treating doctors. The Government didn't agree with this view, and if this law had passed the Senate, it would come back to the House of Representatives and be voted on, and the Government would lose this vote in the House of Representatives as well. But unfortunately the Government had encryption laws which were scheduled to be debated after the legislation on children off Nauru. But because the encryption laws required 170 amendments, they were rushed, they had plenty of holes in them, plenty of opportunities for the hackers and other people to undo the import of the laws, the Government was required to amend those laws as well. So we had a standoff where you had a government who didn't want to vote on laws which were to see children come off Nauru, but were going to lose that vote. So what they did is they talked out, well they filibustered in the Senate, they dragged it out, and then they made Parliament stop at five o'clock, and then went home. And of course once the House of Representatives goes home, these laws and the Senate couldn't be dealt with. But unfortunately this traffic jam the Government created in the Senate to stop the children coming off Nauru, and being dealt with in the House of Reps, until they can stop at five o'clock and go home, meant that vital encryption laws, which the government said had to be passed today, couldn't get dealt with. So the essential problem that we've confronted today is that because the Government went home at 5:00pm, they were willing to sacrifice dealing with national security laws which would see the security agencies able to bust through the encrypted message services and see what terrorists and criminals are doing. They thought that dealing with that law was less of a priority than not being embarrassed and losing a vote on getting children off Nauru. This is what has happened today. So now it falls to Labor to contemplate how we handle the encryption laws which are stuck in the Senate. The Government said earlier this week these encryption laws were vital, had to be dealt with. A joint committee, or a committee made up of politicians from Liberal and Labor, reviewed the laws - and Mark can talk about it in a moment, these encryption laws - and they said there's a lot of problems with this, let's fix them, let's update them. But unfortunately the Government, yet again in its rush, couldn't get these amendments right. So now Labor is put in the invidious position - do we win our argument Mr Morrison because they've rushed laws, because they've prioritised not doing their job, not getting the kids off Nauru, not dealing with encryption, or not staying after 5:00pm. They've done that now they've gone on to have beers or fly home or whatever they do. But there's vital encryption laws stuck in the Senate. I will not sacrifice the safety of Australians merely because Mr Morrison doesn't have the courage to deal with issues in the House of Representatives. So what we say to Mr Morrison and to the Government right now, is if you agree to do the amendments which you've already agreed, to the encryption laws, in the first week of next year, we will pass the encryption laws, unsatisfactory as they are, right now. Because we are not going to go home and leave the Australian people on their own over Christmas with inferior laws of national safety. But I do think it is a tragedy that Mr Morrison is happy to go home, leave national security laws undone, leave kids on Nauru, merely because he didn't want to lose a vote in the House of Representatives. This wouldn't have brought the Government down, getting kids off Nauru. This wouldn't have brought the Government down if we amended the encryption laws and fixed them up as they themselves have agreed needs to be done. But I will not go home until we fix up the laws and keep Australians safe. So I invite the Government to restore a little bit of the public confidence in the Parliament. I think it is shameful they wouldn't deal with the laws which would prioritise the views of treating medical experts to get kids off Nauru when they're sick. I think it is a terrible shame that they wouldn't amend the laws to make the national encryption proposals even better and more efficient. But I couldn't go home and leave Australians over Christmas without some of the protections which we all agree are necessary. I'd like my spokesperson for the Attorney-General to talk further about the amendments, but we want to resolve this, and the Australian people, and someone has got to act like - to be honest - the grownup in the room. We're ready for that.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks very much Bill. The Government brought an inadequate and poorly drafted bill to the Parliament back at the end of September. They referred it to the Intelligence Committee and the Committee started, rightly, on what looked to be a pretty substantial inquiry. It's a very big bill, 175 pages long, amends 10 Acts of Parliament, has five schedules. Two weeks ago, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Home Affairs decided to demand that the Committee accelerate its inquiry and the Committee did just that. It held some urgent hearings at the start of this sitting fortnight, started to deliberate and happily, by the end of yesterday, had reached agreement and the report - a unanimous report of Labor and government members of the Committee - was tabled in the House of Representatives. Extraordinarily, despite the effort that was made by both government and Labor members, all of whom were congratulated by the Chair of the Committee, Mr Hastie, when he tabled the report last night - despite all of those efforts, despite the detailed recommendations that were made by the committee to fix up this poorly drafted and inadequate bill, the Government provided amendments to the House of Representatives this morning, provided them to Labor early this morning, still were providing amendments through the course of the morning, and it became apparent that the Government had brought in amendments - 173 of them - to the House of Representatives which did not conform with the recommendations of the Committee. We told the Government this. I told the Government this on the floor of the House of Representatives. But despite this, the Government decided to shut down Parliament, despite us saying we would need to move amendments to make sure that the bill conformed to the agreement struck between the Government and Labor. The Government wasn't interested. It's packed up the House of Representatives and gone home. And that's why Bill has outlined the offer that we're prepared to make. We think it's too important. We think that the bill does need to go forward but we offer to let it go forward without the amendments that are needed, without the amendments that are required to make it conform to the agreement reached between the Government and Labor, provided the Government agrees next - at the very next sitting day of the Parliament to pass the amendments that we say are needed. In particular - and I'm not going to go into the detail of the amendments, there's several of them but there's a very, very important one - one of the conditions of the agreement struck in the Committee, the agreement struck between the Government and Labor, was that the Committee inquiry, which is a lengthy inquiry and detailed inquiry, continue, the Government left out of the amendments that they brought into the House today. We would insist that the Government create – there’s another mechanism that it can be done by, a reference from the Senate to the Intelligence Committee, so that the inquiry which very many Australians - hundreds of Australians, Australian small and medium sized businesses and large companies and global tech companies, all of whom had been participating in that inquiry - can continue with their input and the very best outcome for Australian security can be reached.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Mark. Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, it is true isn't it that you've backed down here because you are - you're scared that the Government will mount a compelling case that you're weak on national security?

SHORTEN: No, rubbish. I'll tell you what I am doing. I'm not prepared to go home when I know we can pass laws which make Australians safer. This is an important point and I'll come to you next, James. What's happened - and I think it's incumbent for it to be explained clearly and calmly - is that the legislation which would have helped kids off Nauru, had to be dealt with first before the security laws. The Government ran down the clock in the Senate so it didn't have to get the kids off Nauru and the legislation. But the problem is they were willing to sacrifice, therefore, the encryption laws which they know have to be amended. The Government agreed that their rushed encryption laws had to be improved. They agreed in a Committee dominated by Liberal MPs - more Liberal MPs than Labor on it - unanimously agreed the encryption laws need to be improved. But because the other laws - getting the kids off Nauru - had to be dealt with first, they deliberately sabotaged the Parliament and went home rather than sit past 5 o'clock, which they've done on many occasions. So they were willing to play chicken with national security laws. What I'm not prepared to do is go home when I know that if the Government agree to our amendments - amendments they've already agreed to by the way. Let's just make Australians safe over Christmas. I'm not willing to go home and see a terror event happen, which we're told is less likely than more likely, but I'm not going to have on my conscience Mr Morrison's hostage-taking tactics where he cancels his own work, they go home, and then we just leave Australians swinging in the breeze. That's not who I am. James is next, James is next, James is next.

JOURNALIST: Just have to clarify, you have to - you have agreement in principle or in -

SHORTEN: No, we're offering it.

JOURNALIST: No, no - with the Government over these amendments. You don't think these amendments are contentious?

SHORTEN: They did a report with us -

JOURNALIST: Yeah, I agree. But the leadership has accepted that?

SHORTEN: Wait a sec - I'm answering your first question. The Government, when you get a new set of laws on security or anything else, a Committee of parliamentarians from both sides, where the Government always has the numbers, review the proposal. Unanimously, the six Liberals and the five Labor agree that we need to make these amendments. But the problem is – and I know the process is annoying and you don't want to hear about that, you want to talk about winners and losers -

JOURNALIST: No, no. I don't.

SHORTEN: What I'm saying to you here is that the Government and us agree that they couldn't get them done. But what they did do is rather than hang around and get it right - the amendments they've agreed to - they shut down the House of Representatives because the earlier bill would have meant that they were going to be embarrassed.

JOURNALIST: But leaving that point aside and I accept what you’re saying –

SHORTEN: So we have agreement.

JOURNALIST: I know you had agreement in the Committee. Has the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister conveyed the fact that they would accept the Committee’s unanimous report? And secondly, how have you conveyed this offer tonight to the Government?

SHORTEN: I’ll get Mark to answer your first question. But we’re conveying it right now.

JOURNALIST: So you hadn’t spoken to them –

SHORTEN: Well, I have to say the Government did a deal with us to amend in the manner in which we are speaking, but because they didn’t want to deal with kids off Nauru first, they went home. I mean if they go home, they can’t pass the law, that goes without saying. So they sabotaged dealing with the encryption laws, which they had agreed to because they were embarrassed about losing the vote of the kids off Nauru. So what I’m saying tonight is, I don’t want to go another two months, three months, til the Government come back to work and leave Australians at the risk of being exposed to security threats. So if the Government agree tonight, and we are telling them through you and the people of Australia, that if they agree to keep their word on the amendments we will pass the encryption legislation, inadequate as it is, so that at least we give our security agencies some of the tools they say they need. It’s all about putting the people first. But the basis is they’ve got to honour their deal at some point.

JOURNALIST: How can you demand that they give you your amendments next year when you’re now just giving away all your leverage by saying you’re going to wave it through tonight?

SHORTEN: Because I’m not prepared to leave Australians at risk. And they’ve agreed. And you know what, if they come back next year and don’t do what they’ve promised to do, we’ll hold them to account. But what I’m not prepared to do is go home when we should be working here. The reason why this whole snafu has occurred is because the Government didn’t want to lose a vote about taking kids off Nauru, and you all know that’s right. Every one of you here knows that’s right. But because they didn’t want to deal with that issue, they’ve jeopardised the safety of Australians. What I’m going to do is say, alright, get your law through in the inadequate form it is, so long as you agree to keep your word in the first week when Parliament resumes. The real shame is that they are not here now doing the day job that Parliamentarians are expected to do.

JOURNALIST: So are you going to get that in writing that they will agree to those further amendments? And secondly – or you know what’s the sort of agreement from the Government? And also, how is it responsible to pass a bill that you think is inadequate and you’ve got backbenchers saying they don’t even agree to your deal. What’s your response to that?

SHORTEN: You couldn’t have that latter part because I’ve just told you. In terms of what’s responsible, in a beauty parade, there aren’t a lot of good options because the Government went home. Not a lot of good options. We all know that the Government went home and didn’t deal with national security laws because they didn’t want to deal with kids off Nauru. That’s what’s happened. So then the ball is in our court. Do I go home and say I hope nothing happens, and I hope that the Government’s politics don’t backfire on the safety of Australians? I’m not prepared to do it. So if Morrison wants to get up and say he’s some sort of fantastic guy, do you know what, whatever. But I’ve got to live with myself long after I live with what this Government does. And in good conscience, I’m not going to go home when I know we can make Australians safer. The Government must honour what they said unanimously in the Committee with their amendments. We’re just giving the Government, because they got themselves in such a political conundrum, where they wanted to not lose the vote in the House of Reps of five kids on Nauru, you know, that’s a terrible mistake, but what we intend to do is the right thing by the people of Australia.

JOURNALIST: Haven’t you played this as badly as you possibly could, you’ve delivered the Government a victory on its encryption bill and it didn’t even have to face the vote on Nauru that you insisted it would lose?

SHORTEN: Don’t take this the wrong way, but that’s perhaps the difference between you and me. This is not a game. What I don’t like is that the Government went home. I can’t make the Government turn up and do their day job. They’ve shut down the Parliament before. I think it’s to the everlasting shame of the Government that in previous years they could work past 5 o’clock. This nation is run by a government who don’t like working past 5 o’clock when they’re too scared to turn up in Parliament. The Members of Parliament in the House of Reps are democratically elected. This government didn’t want to hear what the House of Reps members were to do. But Michael, merely because these people have done the wrong thing on getting kids off Nauru, do I therefore say that we increase or keep a level of risk about the safety of Australians?

JOURNALIST: But on Michael’s point, haven’t you just, like, the Government’s called your bluff, that you will remain bipartisan on national security and you’re going to pass this bill through –

SHORTEN: You use words like games and bluff, this is –

JOURNALIST: That’s what they did.

SHORTEN: No, what they did was they behaved far worse than that. If the Government say they were playing some game, that’s foolish. Let’s go back to the encryption legislation. The facts matter. Mr Morrison said on November 22, “this is the most important piece of legislation that we can deal with”.  But then he deliberately sabotaged dealing with it by going home because he didn’t want to lose a vote on another law. What I’m not prepared to do is I’m not going to play Mr Morrison’s tactics. He looks at the angle, I look at the outcome.  I want to make sure this Christmas, that I’ve done everything I can to keep Australians safe. That’s what matters to me, not the argy-bargy here. But I do also expect Mr Morrison to keep the deal which they’ve said,  and amend the laws in the manners in which we’ve said. But I’m prepared to wait three months rather than have Australians without the umbrella of these laws.

DREYFUS: If I could just add something to your question. The Government has knowingly passed up the opportunity to have this legislation strong and as well drafted as it could be. And I say that because we’ve made it clear to the Government, this morning, that the amendments that they were bringing to the House and insisting be passed, where of course they have the numbers in the House, on this matter, were not in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee. We've also made it clear for weeks now, that this was an inadequately drafted bill with lots of problems, and that's why the inquiry had to continue, and the Government reneged on that too. That's why we're asking of the Government, its commitment to pass amendments that when we come back, in February, that conform with the recommendations of the Committee and agree that the inquiry will continue. Because the purpose of this inquiry which is, as far as I'm concerned, only halfway through its work and has not reported in detail on all of the evidence that we’ve received, the purpose of this inquiry is to get this legislation right. I’ll give you just one example which is the systemic weakness problem. This government brought a Bill to the parliament into its original form which did not have a definition of systemic weakness. The reason why that's important is because that's part of the provision that ensures that no back doors are going to be created using the processes in the new powers that are in this bill. The Committee agreed, that’s the Government members and Labor members agreed, that there should be a definition of systemic weakness, and gave some indications in the recommendation as to what that definition should look like. The amendments that the Government has brought into the House today, which have now passed the House, still require work. We told the Government that, we told the Government that yesterday and they have chosen to bring to the Senate an inadequate bill. But it is still tremendously better than the form in which it was originally produced by the Government - hold on - and we're prepared to let it go forward on that basis, knowing that there's more work to be done, knowing that the Government hasn't got the amendments right. We're requiring of the Government that it agree and stick to the agreement that it made yesterday.

JOURNALIST: And if they reject the, your offer tonight what will you do?

SHORTEN: We will maintain the course of action we’ve said. If this government won't even agree to improve the law - if this government won't seek to improve the laws they've agreed to do, we will continue to seek to improve the law. The reality is encryption and breaking through it, so our security agencies can make sure they've got digital eyes on terrorists and other criminals is important. The Government made such a botch and such a rush of the law that both Liberal and Labor MPs had to agree unanimously to improve it. The problem is because they didn't want to deal with the Nauru issue first, the poor old encryption laws, which they said were crucial, they were just a bargaining chip to keep the kids on Nauru. But now they've risen. I wish they hadn't risen. You've all been around Parliament. You know the Parliament can sit past 5 o'clock. We have a government who is prepared to take the Australian people in their safety hostage over the summer. They were prepared to go home and not lose a vote on Nauru and sacrifice the improvement in national security. I'm a different person. Someone asked earlier is it a game or is it a bluff, I don’t bluff about the safety of Australians. I don’t play a game with the safety of Australians. This government went home and stopped doing their job. I won’t.

JOURNALIST: Why don't you insist that the House comes back and you just deal with this legislation tomorrow or early next week?

SHORTEN: Well we should.

JOURNALIST: Well why not make that the ultimatum?

SHORTEN: Well sorry, I don’t where you've been today. This government – they don’t like it. We said that they should sit for more than 10 days in the next eight months. They're not doing that. They are the ones who've gone home at 5 o'clock. I can't wait til this government decides to find a work ethic to make sure that we do what we've got to do. So this is a neat solution. We get the agreed amendments which they should have done but haven't done. So we're willing to wait a couple of months to get that and keep Australians safe. This is the only sensible option, now if the Government says no to this, well, I don’t know what they’re doing.

JOURNALIST: You said earlier that if the Nauru deal was, if the Government was defeated in the House of Reps, that wouldn't have brought down the Government. Are you really saying the first government in 80 years to lose a vote in the House of Reps on a piece of legislation, you wouldn’t suggest that that's grounds for an election?

SHORTEN: No, because it's not a supply or confidence bill. It's not going to the ability of the Government to spend money. Whilst it would be a very serious matter, it's not as serious as its ability to, you know, the daily expenditure of government. So it wasn't in that league. A number of the crossbenchers who support Labor's position, and we work with them about kids off Nauru, had said that this wouldn't bring down the Government. We all know that this government has a very large level of pride. And for whatever reason they felt that stopping these, this legislation of kids off Nauru, is more important than passing agreed legislation on national security.

JOURNALIST: So if you don't get a guarantee from the Government tonight you will still pass the laws, as in agreeing to -
SHORTEN: We’ll make our amendments.

JOURNALIST: You’ll still pass it?

SHORTEN: No we'll make our amendments, which they've agreed to, and it will be stuck in, stuck in the Senate. I'm willing to meet the Government to resolve the matter and this is the offer we make. But I think the best thing the Government could do is just come back to work. But I don't think any of you think they're likely to do that. Absent that option, I’m about trying to make sure that we get a workable system. What we're proposing makes sense. They get what they want, we get what we want in February, Australians are safer. The real shame though, and nothing I can do tonight in any set of outcomes or permutations, it means that the legislation with these kids to Nauru can’t happen, but that's just shameful conduct by the Government. What is it about these kids on the Nauru that scares the Government so much, They just go home and stop working?

JOURNALIST: Jacinta Collins has just announced that you are withdrawing the amendments in the Senate, so you're doing that without getting that promise from the Government?

SHORTEN: Michael I’ve made clear what we're doing. We are determined to keep Australians safe. I mean really you've got to ask yourself why wouldn't the Government agree with what we're doing? They've agreed with our amendments. The problem is, because of the way they've botched the amendments, because they decided to keep the kids on Nauru, they can't deal with the improved espionage legislation. So what they have to do is get theirs through and agree to ours in February. It is a solution. What I really regret though, is that the Government chose to go home. We could have passed the improved espionage and security laws in the House of Reps when it came back from the Senate. But of course they can't do that because they might have lost a vote on the floor of Parliament, which ultimately was just going to see some kids get medical treatment. Thanks everybody.
LEIGH SALES, HOST: Mr Shorten, thanks for joining us.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good evening Leigh.

SALES: Today the Prime Minister accused you of being a clear and present threat to Australia's safety. He was talking in the context of asylum seeker policy. I'd like viewers to understand where Labor differs from the Coalition, if it does at all in this area. So let me ask you a series of questions.Do you support the Government's policy of offshore processing of asylum seekers who attempt to come to Australia by boat?

SHORTEN: Yes. I mean, the Prime Minister, you said something that he said which deserves answering and this is the first occasion I've had to answer it since his remarkable press conference. I'm disappointed in what he said but I'm not going to get distracted by it, and that name calling is just not going to solve a single problem.

SALES: As I said, I'd like viewers to try and understand the basic facts as well as the politics. So let me ask, do you support the Government's policy that people who end up on Nauru or Manus Island will never be allowed to resettle in Australia?

SHORTEN: We believe that anyone who comes here via people smuggler should be resettled in a third party nation, yes.

SALES: Does Labor support boat turn backs and will that policy continue if you're in office?

SHORTEN: Yes, we will, we will support boat turn backs where it's safe to do so, which is existing policy.

SALES: Prime Minister Morrison's point is that Kerryn Phelps' Private Members Bill, if it's passed, will allow people smugglers to say to potential clients, "listen, Australia has changed the legislation, you won't have to stay on Nauru or Manus you just get some doctor to sign off in Australia and it's all good mate." This is where he has the point of difference with you. Is that a valid point that he's making?

SHORTEN: There's a point of difference but not the one he's claiming to make. I think after five years this Government should be ashamed of the fact that there are still people on Manus and Nauru and they haven't been resettled. Labor does not accept that the corollary between discouraging the people smuggling trade and keeping people in detention for five plus years. That's shameful. And the specific issue which Kerryn Phelps, crossbenchers, Labor and other parties were discussing, was where you've got two treating doctors say that a child needs a treatment in Australia, then that's got to be taken very seriously. And by the way, what Mr Morrison says is so bad about Labor, they quietly do anyway, but what we want to do is put some rules and certainty around it. It is not the case that to deter people smugglers and defeat their trade, we have to keep people in indefinite detention. That is not a healthy Australian way to do business here.

SALES: So you reject Mr Morrison's suggestion that if this Phelps Bill were to pass that it would give people smugglers an opening to restart the trade?

SHORTEN: The thing giving people smuggler's the best encouragement in 2018 is the constant billboard which the Government do when they say, oh if Labor gets elected, which is possible at the next election, they are egging the people smuggler's on to try their hand again. It is the Government who constantly say "oh well, if it's not us then the people smugglers will be back in business." These criminal syndicates are pretty sophisticated. So it is the Government sending a signal to the people they say they're trying to stop, that if they're not in Government, the Liberals are encouraging them to try again.

SALES: We know that this Bill has now been delayed until Parliament resumes next year, that's a few months away, a couple of months away, what happens to children who need medical evacuation during that period of time?

SHORTEN: Well, I just hope that the treating medical advice gets taken seriously. You know, there have been some children coming here anyway. I just think it's a shame that the Parliament of Australia, because the Government didn’t want to sit past five o'clock on a Thursday night, can't deal with this issue and other very important issues. The real problem today - and no wonder people hate politics, probably sick of the lot of us -  is that they found out today that the Government who is paid big dollars, say it's five o'clock we're going home now. I mean, they've done that not because they care about what's happening on Nauru but because they didn't want to lose a vote in Parliament. This is all about protecting the pride of the Government and the Prime Minister, than worrying about the big issues which should be dealt with. Did you know Leigh, that on many occasions at the Christmas sitting of Parliament, we go past five o'clock in the House of Representatives if we have important business to finish. The Government didn't want to work past five o'clock because they were simply embarrassed that they wouldn't get their way on important issues.

SALES: Let me ask you about another issue that came up today.

SHORTEN: Sure.

SALES: The Government's accusing Labor of being weak on national security again, because of some of your concerns about the encryption bill. This morning you did vote in of it despite saying you wanted more time to consider it, despite concerns about the way it was drafted and despite the Bill containing amendments that you hadn't seen. It's now stuck in the Senate until next year. Why did you end up voting for it even with all those concerns?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, the Government a few weeks ago said that they wanted to look at how we can break through the encrypted telecommunications of people who are criminals, terrorists and the like. We said that's fair enough. The Government presented draft legislation and there were hearings into it. A parliamentary committee which is majority government and minority Labor heard them. But what happened is that we had an agreed approach which would have seen the Bill dealt with this week. Unfortunately the Government on Sunday or Monday said "no, we're going to have a fight with Labor." They're not worried about the outcome. Just the angle. And then what happened is that when we finally got back to an agreed approach, the Government presented 170 changes to very serious matters which go to digital privacy, security, safety. What we've managed to do in the course of today, in one day, is we got an agreed position last night, Liberal and Labor working together as we should, and today the Government gave us the 170 changes. They're now being debated in the Senate. The Prime Minister said this law was fundamental to keeping us safe over Christmas but because the Senate hadn't done it by three o'clock today, what's happened is the Government's gone home. That's not a way to run safety. Terrorists don't knock off at five o'clock on the first Thursday in December.

SALES: Let's go to some of the other issues that were on the radar this week. The Government says it will return to a surplus from the 2019 Federal Budget.  At the last election you had a slower return to surplus timetable than the Government. If the Government does deliver a surplus in April, will the Budget remain in surplus if Labor forms government or do you anticipate you'll need to go back into deficit to fund all of your promises?

SHORTEN: I'm confident, based on the economic reforms that we've engaged in in Opposition, that we will a very positive position on surplus over the four years, and a much better position than the Liberals over the 10 years, because we're winding back unsustainable tax subsidies at the top end, which in fact the Government want to keep.

SALES: Does a very positive position on surplus mean you anticipate staying in surplus?

SHORTEN: That's our aim and the point about it, but just to come to that, we do need to see what numbers the Government have got. I know people get sick of politics but this Government is going to bring down a Budget on April 2 and then rush off to an election. They're not really looking for scrutiny of their conduct.

SALES: On climate change policy, will Labor put a price on carbon?

SHORTEN: We're not going back to the policies of the past. We're not going to have a carbon tax.

SALES: No, but will you price carbon?

SHORTEN: No. What we're going to do is prioritise, and I'll give you the key features of what we're doing. We're not getting to, with respect, announce all our policies before the election tonight, but what I can say through you to your viewers, we want to see that by 2030 half of our energy sources come from renewable energy. We do want to reduce our carbon emissions in Australia by 45 per cent. We want to make sure that we are prioritising renewable technology, it's getting cheaper all the time. So we will absolutely going to have very positive climate policies which we'll unveil. I've already announced our energy policy six months out, which will see us investing in solar batteries for households where the income is under $180,000. Two million Australian households have got solar panels on their roofs. What we want to do is encourage the take-up of batteries so people can get lower prices and take control over their power bills and help in the fight against climate change.

SALES: At the last election when Labor proposed to wind back negative gearing, the housing market was experiencing much stronger growth than it is now. Now in some places it is actually going backwards, houses are losing value. Will you rethink that negative gearing policy?

SHORTEN: We're going to stick to our existing policies. It's just not fair for our younger generation to not be able to afford their first home when the Government of the day is giving a tax subsidy to property investors to buy their fifth or sixth. We want to keep the dream of Australian home ownership alive.

SALES: Sorry to interrupt, but, and what's going on in the property market at the moment doesn't give you pause on that?

SHORTEN: What's going on in the property market at the moment is the banks are restricting credit. It's unrelated to our policy. What we want to do is provide a level playing field for first-home buyers. I'm a parent of teenagers. They're still at home, I don't know where they're going, that's great, but one day they're going to want to buy their own home. I think I'm like a lot of parents and indeed grandparents who wonder how will their kids ever enter the housing market? So what we want to do is level the playing field. The issue around housing prices, that's driven by the fact the banks aren't lending as much money as they once were, not our policy. We're not even in government, and we have said to everyone who currently enjoys this tax subsidy, we're not changing the rules for you. You've invested under one set of rules. We won't change the goal posts but we want to make long-term reform to put fairness back into the housing market for first home buyers.

SALES: How many times have you spoken to Malcolm Turnbull since he ceased being Prime Minister?

SHORTEN: I've spoken to him a few times. But I notice the conspiracy of the far right against Malcolm Turnbull. I mean, they kicked him out.

SALES: But what do you talk to him about?

SHORTEN: First of all, the first conversation I had for him was to thank him for his service to the nation. I've spoken to former Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard, I've spoken to John Howard on occasion, I've spoken to Tony Abbott. I respect the office of Prime Minister. And I think the toxic partisanship, where we've got to take the view that because someone from another party said something, that you've got to hate them. I won't be that sort of Prime Minister. If I'm Prime Minister I want to reach out to all our former Prime Ministers and make sure we utilise some of their capacity. But let me be really clear, not that Malcolm needs me to speak for him, he's a Liberal, he's not voting for me, but he was Prime Minister for three years. He was a smart man. I didn't agree with a lot of what he was saying but I think the idea that I should never speak to a former Prime Minister because he's of a different political party, that thinking is just weird.

SALES: Finally, 2019, there's an election year as we've alluded to several times, for all of the campaigns in memory, the leaders of the major parties have committed to two prime time interviews during the campaign on 7.30. Are you happy to agree to that again for 2019?

SHORTEN: Yes, let's do that, Leigh. That would be great.

SALES: Look forward to seeing you next year. Bill Shorten, thank you.

SHORTEN: Thank you.
SUBJECT: Removing exemptions for discrimination against LGBTIQ students.
BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. My Deputy Leader and I want to make some brief remarks concerning the importance of removing discrimination against children at school. I believe that the substantial majority of our parliament want to see discrimination against children - the right to discriminate against children removed from the nation's laws. It is therefore very disappointing that the Government in the lower house has chosen to put forward a proposal which will replace one form of discrimination with another. I get that all the sides of politics genuinely I think, in most cases want to remove discrimination off the law books. I also understand the importance a lot of people feel that religious faith should be able to be taught in schools. I don't see these two goals as irreconcilable. However, whilst I think there is substantial momentum to remove discrimination against children, I don't think the Parliament at this point has been able to come across a mechanism which sufficiently reassures religious schools about how to teach faith, and their ability in fact to teach faith, without actually reintroducing the same discrimination sought to be removed, in a new form. Our legal advice about the Government's proposed amendment is that it has the potential to permit discrimination against students in schools both direct and indirect. The advice goes on to say that the provisions which we seek to put in would not prevent the provision of instruction in an educational institution. So we believe our simple proposal, which removes the exemption against discrimination against children - that works. Now the Government's not convinced of that, or perhaps not the Prime Minister. Very sensibly at about 10:34 this morning in the Senate, Senator Cormann, the Leader of the Government in the Senate and Senator Penny Wong, and indeed, the minority party, the crossbench parties - all agreed that whilst we want to remove discrimination against kids, the mechanisms to do so weren't agreed and therefore the matter should be deferred until there was more considered discussion, and I can understand that that was a sensible course of action. But what really disappointed me, and has led to myself accompanying Tanya out to talk about this issue, is that 10 minutes later, our Prime Minister enthusiastically bounded out to a press conference and said that he wanted to deal with in a controversial fashion, the very measures which the Government in the Senate had decided to defer. So we say to the Prime Minister that this partisanship is not where the debate goes. I get there's legitimate anxieties from religious schools and we respect that, and I get that there is an overwhelming desire to remove discrimination against children. How could it be otherwise? The Parliament hasn't come across a mechanism which seems to get that balance right, but unfortunately the Prime Minister has sought to weaponise this dispute, and I do think that rather than looking for the angle, the Prime Minister should look for the outcome. There is no set of circumstances where this Parliament should be voting to replace one set of laws permitting discrimination against children with another set of laws permitting discrimination against children. I'd now like to hand over to Tanya Plibersek, our Deputy Leader and education spokesperson.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Bill. Before the Wentworth by-election, we had a Prime Minister that said that it was an urgent priority to remove discrimination against children, the ability to discriminate against LGBTI kids in Catholic and independent schools. And I think the country breathed a sigh of relief, I think most Australians were unaware of the fact that this ability to discriminate against children in non-government schools existed. Labor was on board for that change, we came back to the Parliament with high hopes that we could move on this change quickly because it is a simple thing to do. At the moment, there is an exemption from the operation of the Sex Discrimination Act that applies to children in Catholic and independent schools, so they don't have the protection of the Sex Discrimination Act in relation to being a gay or lesbian student in that school. Simple; we just remove the exemption from the operation of the Sex Discrimination Act that applies in schools. We thought we could get this done in the first couple of weeks after the Wentworth by-election, but something changed. And I think what changed was that the right-wing of the Liberal Party said to Scott Morrison, Prime Minister, that's not happening, we're not doing that. And since then we've had delay, obfuscation, division. We now in this parliamentary sitting week, the final week of the parliamentary sittings, are in a situation that is so reminiscent of the marriage equality debate where individual senators, the conservatives in the Liberal Party, the Nationals and others, are all trying to introduce complicating amendments to something that really is very simple. I'm worried that this will go down the same route at the marriage equality debate. Someone will be suggesting a plebiscite next. Now, just today, the Prime Minister further complicates issues by suggesting a conscience vote. Labor doesn't need a conscience vote because every member of the Labor Party agrees that it's wrong to discriminate against children. It's not complicated. In fact, I don't understand how anyone who claims to have a conscience can think that it's ok to discriminate against children. The vast majority of schools have made clear to us that they don't want these provisions, they don't use these provisions, they don't want to discriminate against children in their schools. They've made it clear to us that they don't want to discriminate against children in their schools, that they are happy for this change to proceed. They don't want to use these exemptions from the Sex Discrimination Act. In turn Labor has made it clear to schools through the explanatory memorandum of our Bill, through a second reading amendment moved by my colleague, Senator Jacinta Collins that nothing in our Bill prevents religious schools from teaching the tenants of their faith, from teaching religious instruction in their schools. There is nothing in our Bill that prevents that. There is a very nasty scare campaign being run by the right-wing of the Liberal Party saying that this somehow undermines religious freedoms when it doesn't. This is simple. Do we support discrimination against children or do we not? If we don't support discrimination against children in our schools then we move the simple bill, support the simple bill that removes the right to discriminate. We should not allow this to be complicated by political agendas other than the simple desire to let our children live their true selves, not to be discriminated against in their schooling.

JOURNALIST: You said this is partisan; you've also said that the government is weaponising this issue. But isn't a conscious vote a way to avoid that partisanship and stop it being weaponised? Why don't you support a conscience vote?

SHORTEN: No one with a conscience supports discrimination.

JOURNALIST: But that means you're deciding the views of your own Labor MPs?

SHORTEN: No, no, it's Labor Party policy not to support discrimination. Frankly, the fact that these crude exemptions to the law currently exist, reflects on a lack of progress in the past and it's well past the hour to remove - well long past the time, if it ever in fact was the time, to have exemptions where kids could be discriminated against on the basis of their sexuality. So do you really need the Prime Minister's mechanism - no we don't. I think - in fact I know from survey after survey, most Australians do not support discrimination against kids. Let's go to where this debate started. This is the backwash of what happened a year ago. We had the marriage equality postal survey, a very complicated and expensive process But as the sop of the right-wing of the Liberal Party, Mr Turnbull said we better have an inquiry into religious freedom. Now that report was conducted, paid for by the taxpayers and it was concluded by about April or May - we've never seen it. If the government was being fair dinkum they would actually provide the report to the Australian people and indeed, to other members of the parliament. And so what's happened is that before Wentworth, Mr Morrison I think was concerned, in what was viewed as a socially progressive electorate, to be seen to want to talk about some issues and someone who didn't like Mr Morrison leaked the report and maybe - who knows. But the problem is this debate became public, and I think a lot of Australians discovered for the first time that it's legal to discriminate against kids. So we want to remove that and so -
JOURNALIST: What's the -

SHORTEN: Hang on this is a very important context to get; how did we arrive at this point because a lot of Australians would be looking at the parliament right now and saying why is it that when it comes to these issues, the parliament just sort of, disappears into finger-pointing and recrimination. It really is hopeless. What we've recognised is that we want to remove the discrimination, the exemption to discrimination - allowing it, we want to get rid of that. The Government doesn't like what we've proposed, they've proposed amendments which like it or not, our legal advice says will replace one form of discrimination with another. Calm heads prevailed in the Senate, you know Senator Cormann -

JOURNALIST: So why not have a conscious vote -

SHORTEN: Sorry, this is really - David there will be plenty of time for questions, because what the people of Australia don't want is this debate reduced down to little sound bites. Senator Cormann said in the Senate that the Government and the Opposition need more time to progress the discussions to make sure we get it right. 10 minutes later the Prime Minister bounds out and says lets you know, have a different way of doing it. So we are deeply frustrated because this isn't just about discrimination against kids, although that's the number one issue. What we've got here is yet again, the parliament set a test by the people of Australia and it's just descending into high farce.
JOURNALIST: What's your legal advice say though, what do you fear would happen under the government's bill?

SHORTEN: Well we will provide it to you, but it says and I'll quote “there can be little down in my opinion” - this is the Senior Counsel – “that amendment KQ149”, which is the amendment which the government is proposing, “has the potential to permit discrimination against students, in school both direct and indirect.”

JOURNALIST: Where is the resolution here; where do you meet in the middle?

SHORTEN: Good question.

JOURNALIST: Because my understanding is from what Scott Morrison said this morning schools can't prejudice, discriminate against gay students. But they also said that schools had the right to teach their religious beliefs. Isn’t it just inevitable that there is always going to be a clash here?

SHORTEN: No.

JOURNALIST: How do you resolve it?

SHORTEN: Your question goes to the heart of the problem.

JOURNALIST: So how do you change it?

SHORTEN: Well let me explain. I think that most Australians, I'm sure all of you here and most people in the government and certainly everyone in the Opposition wants to remove the right to discriminate against kids - we agree on that. We also agree that we want to make sure that religious based schools can teach their faith according to their principles. We haven’t come across a mechanism which satisfies that second point to the satisfaction if you like, of the competing points of view.

JOURNALIST: But isn't it inevitable that we'll never come to that point of view because they both mutually oppose each other?

SHORTEN: Well I am not prepared to give up. I am not prepared to give up on removing discrimination against kids and respecting religion in our society. But what we don't have today is a solution. And so the question is when you don't have a solution, do you just engage in a train wreck or do you draw breath?  I mean, the problem is that if you don't have an answer today, you can either have a big fight and divide this country and start you know, antagonising and making everyone nervous about who cares about what? Or does the Parliament do what we're paid to do, which is we sit down and we keep working through the issue.

JOURNALIST: Why do you think that Scott Morrison is doing this then? Could it not be he is doing it because he promised he would get it done in the Wentworth by-election, he hasn't got it done, he wants to close down that criticism? Or do you see something more sinister here?

SHORTEN: I'll get Tanya to perhaps answer some of that. But I'll just say this; I don't know, in my heart of hearts, Mr Morrison's motivation. But what I do know is that I do recognise a problem looming. Now in the Senate this morning, Mr Morrison's own Government worked with Labor and said listen, we haven't got it right yet, so as much as each would like to sort of, pursue a particular solution, we have got enough respect for competing points of view to try to get it right. But unfortunately 10 minutes later, we got this sort of crash through or crash approach which I don't think, in fact I fundamentally don't believe is the right way for the nation. We had enough division during the marriage equality debate, we don't need to repeat it because the politicians can't get their act together, but I might let Tanya talk a little further.

PLIBERSEK: I think the reason for this is pretty clear. I think that Scott Morrison initially proposed action in this area before the Wentworth by-election because he wanted to win a few votes. Since the Wentworth by-election, the right of his party have said no, it's not on. And like on every other issue Scott Morrison is capitulating to the hard right of his party, the reactionary right winger as the Member for Chisholm called them. What was it, "homophobic, women-hating, climate change deniers", as Kelly O'Dwyer called them. This is not complex, it's not hard to do. And we are once again travelling down the same path that we travelled down with the marriage equality debate, which Peter Dutton admits the plebiscite was introduced in order to prevent marriage equality. We're now introducing these issues of religious freedoms in order to prevent law reform, to protect gay and lesbian kids.

JOURNALIST: Except this time we’ve got a conscience vote, whereas same-sex marriage, there was not a conscience vote. This time that's what the Prime Minister is offering.

PLIBERSEK: What nonsense. What is he offering? He's not offering a single thing, Fran. And it bothers me that someone as experienced as you would be sucked in by this as an offer.

JOURNALIST: Why not -

PLIBERSEK: No, listen to me, this is really important. Labor Members of Parliament do not support discrimination against children. We don't need to take the temperature of the party to know that. We have had this discussion again and again. We do not support the discrimination against school children and no Australian with a conscience should support discrimination against children.

JOURNALIST: But is the other side of that argument that you don't support schools being able to teach their faith?

PLIBERSEK: No, absolutely not. Our advice shows, our legal advice from Maurice Blackburn shows that the proposition that the Prime Minister is putting forward swaps one legal form of discrimination with another legal form of discrimination. We have made it clear, in the explanatory memorandum to this bill. We have made it clear in Senator Collins' Second Reading Amendment that there is nothing in our legislation that prevents the teaching of religious instruction, including the tenants of the faith of the organisation, including mandating attendance at chapel, including religious instruction during the school day. All of that is untouched by our legislation and it is a wicked scare campaign on behalf of the Prime Minister and the Conservatives to suggest otherwise. It is not true and it is quite wicked.

JOURNALIST: Why not use a conscience vote and then seek to amend this bill on the floor of Parliament, which is what a free vote could do?

PLIBERSEK: Why are we contorting ourselves with all of these should we do this, or should we do that, when the solution is simple? The solution is remove the exemptions from the Sex Discrimination Act that allow discrimination against school children. It is simple. And just as with marriage equality, every effort to complicate it, is designed to delay and prevent this simple reform from occurring.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask more a bit more about the complexity of it, Mr Shorten maybe you could answer this.

SHORTEN: Sure.

JOURNALIST: When it comes to discrimination and what it actually is, if a faith or tenant of the faith is that being gay is wrong, homosexuality is wrong, is that discrimination in your mind, or is that just a reflection of a faith?

SHORTEN: Well let me go to our legal -

JOURNALIST: Because this gets the (inaudible) of it -

SHORTEN: Yes but Andrew this is not a sort of, debating society, this press conference. What we're talking about -

JOURNALIST: This is fundamental to it, isn't it?

SHORTEN: No actually, let me go to what is fundamental. The Government is proposing a mechanism which will lead to greater division in the community and it doesn't solve anything. It replaces one form of discrimination with another. I'll go specifically-

JOURNALIST: Okay, no I'll ask about your model then -

SHORTEN: I'm going to go - no I'm going to go specifically to point 7 in the advice from Mark Gibian, Senior Counsel. "Discrimination is where a person is treated less favourably by reason of, or for example, the person's sex, sexual orientation, gender identity. Now, if a school provides religious instruction or teaches religious beliefs to all students in a school, it would not be treating any student less favourably.” Now this is -

JOURNALIST: Well let's go to your model, then? Okay under your model, if a school taught that homosexuality was wrong, would that be discrimination? Under your model?

SHORTEN: Any church, religious based educational institution is allowed to teach the faith according to their tenants. But what they shouldn't be able to do is to discriminate against children by virtue of their sexual identity. And let's also be really, really clear here.

JOURNALIST: Haven't you just agreed with the Government?

SHORTEN: Most schools – no. Most schools do not want this debate. Most schools, religious schools, treat their kids very well. We've got to go to this division, guys.

PLIBERSEK: We have a division. Sorry, we have to go.

SHORTEN: Are there any remaining questions on this issue?

JOURNALIST: Isn't the public entitled to take an incredibly dim view of all of you? You've had two months to come to a solution on what you admit is a very simple question and you haven't been able to do that. Aren't they entitled to judge all of you on both sides quite harshly for not being able to do that and for blaming each other for it?

SHORTEN: Well I tell you what, I'd rather get it right than wrong. And if that means taking a little longer than we otherwise wanted to, that's what we've got to do. I understand though the frustration people, and I said that in the earlier part of my press conference. I think the vast majority of Australians, and the vast majority of members of parliament, want to remove the right to discriminate against kids. There have been some concerns raised from religious institutions that they feel impinged upon their ability to teach their faith in their curriculum. We accept that we need to get it right. And in the Senate I have to say, at 10:30 this morning, the Government, the Opposition and the crossbenchers all agreed, let's take a little bit longer and get it right. But unfortunately, we've seen a crash or crash through approach, an almost immature approach in the House of Representatives, which says it's my way or the highway. And I can't turn my back on credible legal advice that the Government's proposals will replace one form of discrimination with another. I think we've seen this pattern in the Government more generally; rush and haste. Haste and rush is no substitute for getting results. We've seen it in unrelated areas on the move of the embassy, on rushed encryption laws, on the divestment of energy companies. Every time the Government rushes in like a bull in a china shop, we've got to go back and get it right. And I don't think there's any issue more important after a year - it's the one year anniversary of marriage equality, we'd rather get it right and not see a divisive debate yet again take up so much time and cause so much harm.

JOURNALIST: So Tanya was saying just before that it's simple, you just remove the subsection that allows schools this right to discriminate. Now you're saying it's more complicated, we need more time to get right?

SHORTEN: No, what I'm actually saying is this; we think it's simple, the Government doesn't agree with our approach. But I've got enough respect for trying to bring people together in this country, that let's take the time and find the mechanism which does its very best to make sure that no child is discriminated against, but that religious educational institutions feel that they're able to teach their curriculum in their faith. I think the solution is straightforward but when there's a body of opinion which doesn't agree yet, we want to try and get it right. But this debate won't take too long. And I think Mr Morrison should follow the lead of the Leader of the Government in the Senate. I mean Senator Cormann said at 10:34 that they were going to defer this issue so further conversations could take place. But then eight minutes later, that time - we didn't realise the window for conversation was eight minutes and then out bounds the energetic Prime Minister saying let's just resolve all of this straight away.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to students who will now return to school next year without extra protections in place for them? Have you let them down?

SHORTEN: No, I think we are determined to remove discrimination and what we will do is we'll get it right. And what I can't do, in good faith is rush a solution which entrenches a new form of discrimination.
JOURNALIST: And what would you say to LGBTI people of various ages who constantly feel like their rights are being treated like a political football?

SHORTEN: I've got sympathy for that. I've got a lot of sympathy for that. An exemption against a law which says that it's okay to discriminate against people based on their marital status, whether or not they're pregnant, whether or not - their sexuality. Those laws should never have had a place, it's a crude tool and they do need to be removed. We'll keep working on that and we will remove it. So what I just say to people who feel put upon, you've got a lot of friends, this parliament will get it right. But I want to make sure we get it right and don't instead, re-entrench discrimination in a new form. Thanks everybody.
TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS: I’ll get us started then. As the Shadow Arts - today we've been launching our live music policy, Australia's contemporary music policy, the most comprehensive policy that any side of politics has launched for contemporary music and the reason for that is simple. At the moment Australian music is at a crossroads with streaming, the internationalisation of the industry, the countries that get the policy wrong, will end up simply listening to whatever comes out of L.A. The countries who get the policy right will not only have their own music as their own soundtrack to their country, but also have their anthems heard all around the world. Today's policy goes all the way from the beginning in making sure children get that first entry into music when they're at school, right through the working life of the performer, and making sure as well that there's a fair deal for people to be able to buy tickets without being ripped off by companies at Viagogo, where at best they spend a fortune on tickets that were worth a whole lot less and being charged a whole lot less, or they get to the gate and what they've paid for doesn't even get them in the door. So I'm really proud of where we've got to today, and you only had to look around that room to see the extraordinary endorsement we have from the songwriters of the nation. I'll hand over to Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Tony. Not your standard political meeting today, but it was very entertaining and I congratulate Tony and all the organisers of it. Labor today is saying that we're going to back live music in this country. The music industry in Australia employs 64,000 people, it generates literally billions of dollars. Australians are very proud of Australian musicians both at home and overseas.But we can't take the future of our music industry for granted. It needs government help. So today, Labor's announcing a package of policies to back music and to back live music. We're going to make sure there are more music teachers in schools and more support for budding musicians to fall in love with music. We're going to make sure that the bands as they're starting off get that extra support to make sure that if they want to go international that they've got a little bit of support behind them, so they can fulfil their dreams and their talents. We're also going to work to help support the mental health of people who work in the industry because it's a very tough business. And also today, we're going to hear a bit more from my spokesperson Madeleine King in a moment. We are going to say to the ticket scalpers Viagogo and the rest of them, that Labor is going to do to you what we've done to the big banks. We're going to end the rorts and the rip offs. Why should working families have to pay hundreds of dollars more than the face value of a ticket when the ticket gets resold? This has become an area - ticket sales, which has become prey to a lack of regulation that hasn't kept up with the technology. Where you've got sophisticated ticket re-sellers using computer algorithms and bots to be able to buy up big slabs of tickets when they go on sale, and then resell these tickets at much higher prices, at inflated prices. Fans are losing out and events, big sporting events and concerts are already expensive enough to go to, but when you're paying extra to the rorts and the rip off merchants, to the scalpers, well then enough is enough. So today Labor is declaring that we're on the side of the music industry of Australia, the musicians and the music teachers, all the families who want their kids to fall in love with music. But now I might just invite Madeleine King to talk a little bit further about our sensible changes, to make sure the cost of living needs of fans who want to go to sport and music events, that they're able to afford to do so.

MADELEINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CONSUMER AFFAIRS: Thanks Bill and thanks Tony. Congratulations Tony on a magnificent arts policy for music and live music in this country. I want to talk a little bit about the new ticketing, fair ticketing policy that Labor is going to adopt. I'll be blunt and I'll be to the point - ticket scalping is a scourge. It's a rip off and it has to stop. It's unfair to music lovers around this country, it's unfair to sports fans, and it's also unfair to the artists and the athletes who are sick to death of seeing their fans being ripped off time after time for these major events. So what we're going to do is introduce a nationwide ban on the use of automated bot software. This is the software that goes in and buys many hundreds or even thousands of tickets in an instant before the punters at home, you or me, ordinary consumers get to buy tickets to your favourite artist or your favourite sporting team event. We're also going to make sure that there is a price cap on the resale of tickets. So this will stop the extraordinary and exorbitant rip off prices that we see reselling websites, like Viagogo, and there are more, when they seek to sell tickets to events, music events, sporting events at extraordinary prices that people simply can't afford. Labor is also going to make sure the restrictions on any tickets, that there’s a fair disclosure of these things, so when people do buy them they know what they're buying, they know where they are sitting, they know what they'll be able to see, they don't have any other restrictions on the tickets - this is only fair and reasonable. And we're also going to make sure that when you do buy a ticket from someone else, a friend or family or someone for a fair and reasonable price, in a reasonable way that you won't get that ticket cancelled from underneath you when you arrive at the gate. And this is a fair and reasonable thing to do, to protect Australian consumers that just want to go to a concert, want to see a game of cricket or a game of footy and they should be able to do so. And the other thing that Labor is committed to doing is getting the ACCC to review the effect of this legislation on this policy 12 months after it comes into effect. And that's because Labor is serious about stopping these rip off merchants. If these measures don't have the effect we want them to do - and I think they will, but if they don't, we are going to take action and make sure - we are going to take more action and make sure these rip off merchants are stopped in their tracks and stop ripping off Australian music lovers, Australian sports fans. So with that I'll hand back to Bill, thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Great thanks Madeleine. If there are any questions on today's announcements or anything else?

JOURNALIST: In relation to Viagogo, it's already being chased by the ACCC anyway, it's an international company, how would you possibly police them?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we've got the ACCC, we'll give them the powers to police it. I also think that there's a proposition, state governments have already started to do some of what we've said but I think that it needs national coordination. We want to make it very clear that the days of people having to pay more than 10 percent on a ticket which is sold to them after it's already been purchased by someone else - so capping it at 10 per cent of the extra price. I think that once that message gets out, the consumers are going to be a lot better off, but I might get Tony to talk a little bit further how we intend to put some teeth behind what we've said.

BURKE: Viagogo rips people off in a whole series of ways, and at the moment they are being prosecuted for one of them. One of the things they do is claim to be the official seller, they use the word 'official' in their title and they are not. You type the name of any band and the word tickets and they come up as the first entry usually on most search engines. By saying you can't sell a ticket for more than a 10 per cent mark-up, having the 110 per cent limit, that effectively says it's not just the issue here and there that Viagogo do that the ACCC can prosecute, they can prosecute the entire business model. So the powers of the ACCC shift massively with what's being announced today in terms of dealing with Viagogo. Viagogo will respond to this in one of two ways, either they will become a reputable company in their dealings with Australia and if that's the outcome we're fine with that. Or 12 months after the change the ACCC will report back and say that further powers Federally are needed, and if that's what comes back, that's what we'll do.

JOURNALIST: But is there anything you can actually do? Viagogo is an international company so how could you prosecute them, they are out of our jurisdiction?

BURKE: Well they're appearing in the courts at the moment, they are taking very seriously the prosecution that is happening at the moment from the ACCC. So they are taking this seriously, the UK is acting on them as well. The problem at the moment is that under Australian law it's only a fraction of their business model that's actually legally a problem. But as I say and what Madeline made clear is if this change isn't enough and Viagogo decide to say, they don't care about Australian law at all, then we'll keep legislating until this is fixed.

JOURNALIST: What is the power the government has to limit the price increase?

BURKE: It's under Australian consumer law.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider blocking these websites in the same way piracy websites have been banned in Australia?

BURKE: To have that sort of process - the first thing is to say will this change in consumer law fix it, and if this change in consumer law fixes it then it's done, and Viagogo can't rip people off anymore. If this change doesn't then you can expect a number of options that would come back from the ACCC after they did the 12 month review. We will deal with that then. We're having the first change which directly attacks the entire model that Viagogo have been using to rip people off.

JOURNALIST: And the proposed fines for businesses and individuals are quite substantial. Is that justifiable?

BURKE: Yes on this, on the fines and that part of consumer law, we're beyond arts and we're well and truly into consumer, so I’ll pass that across.

KING: Well they're the existing fines, the $10 million, that's a maximum fine under the Australian consumer law at the moment. So if these things are decided in courts just like the Viagogo case at the moment that's in the Federal Court and the judge will decide what that penalty will be. I'm sure the ACCC when they see, quite frankly reprehensible acts and the case that the ACCC have put forward in this Viagogo case is very impressive, and I agree with all of their submissions, and I expect they will ask for higher penalties and that would be the judge who decides.

JOURNALIST: How much is the resale market worth?

KING: The resale market, I mean I don't think we can measure the whole size of it. What we know is that the automatic bots take up about 30 per cent of tickets out of the market, out of the primary market for normal consumers, and the value of the resale market depends of course on how much ticket resellers that rip people off, how much they're going to rip people off by. So it's not quantifiable.

BURKE: Can I just - sorry, if I may. On the question of what's the resale market worth, let's think of what it's worth to somebody who buys a ticket. Now you have a look at the material that Gang of Youths have compiled only in the last week. One person says he paid in the order of $300 for tickets that were meant to be worth $90. He's a casual on $15 an hour. You have people spending this sort of money even if they get in the door, they've already been ripped off. But a whole lot of people who then turn up to the festival or the gig and it turns out that they've sold the same ticket over and over again. So whoever had that ticket first got through and everybody else gets turned away. If you've had to travel there you've had to book accommodation all of that, that money's just gone, completely gone ,and that's the cost that we need to be able to fix.

JOURNALIST: In terms of the ticket bots, are you introducing new software or what are you doing exactly to make sure that they're not buying these ticket?

KING: Well this is something - we're in opposition which you all know. We want to be in government, when we're in government, where we have the resources of government that's when we'll be able to look further at how this legislation is put together and the means by which we'll stop these automated software bots. As anyone that knows this industry would know there's legislation on this in some states in the country, but also in the UK and the US and in Canada. So we're, in fact Australia is late to this game, late to protect artists and consumers and athletes in this space of ticket scalping. So we will learn from other jurisdictions. We'll see what their experiences are and take that on board as we develop the tools to use to get rid of these invidious and insidious software bots.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten can I just ask you in relation to Adani, would you consider scrapping the approvals on that project if you got into power?

SHORTEN: Well nothing's changed from what we've said previously. I remain a sceptic of Adani. They've had plenty of false starts and they've had plenty of broken promises. We've made it very clear that there shouldn't be any Commonwealth taxpayer money directly or indirectly in this investment. We'll back the scientists. Now we don't know what they'll be up to by the time we get into government, so we'll deal with the facts of the situation we’re presented with, if we win the election in 24 weeks’ time. But suffice to say we'll make decisions at that point based in the national interest. Of course we're not interested in sovereign risk or breaking contracts. We'll be guided by the best science and the national interest.

JOURNALIST: I've just been at Martin Place. There's been literally thousands of school students protesting Adani saying "stop Adani", calling on the Prime Minister to change. What are your thoughts on that?

SHORTEN: I saw Mr Morrison objected to the kids going to protest. Well, that's one way to stop the kids going to protest, it's do something about climate change. I think - you'd hope they wouldn't do it every day, but I can understand why kids are passionate about these matters. I also think it's a bit difficult for the government to give a lecture the kids missing a couple of hours at school when the Morrison Government's only going to sit for eight days - ten days at parliament in the next eight months. I mean, the kids might have a look at Mr Morrison and say well you don't even go to work mate.

JOURNALIST: Are you a keen to discourage the development of other coal mines?

SHORTEN: Do you mean thermal or coking coal?

JOURNALIST: Both.

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we've got the existing mines, they'll keep operating. I've made it very clear that coal is still part of our energy mix going forward. But Labor wants to see real action on climate change. I think this government can't afford just to pretend that renewables aren't the way of the future. I outlined with Mark Butler and Chris Bowen last Thursday, a series of changes we would like to see. So one, we acknowledge coal still has a part of our future - both in an export context and also, in power generation in Australia. But a Labor Government I lead is going to back in investment in renewables. We're setting a goal that by 2030, 50 per cent of our energy mix should come from renewables. We've said that we want to roll out 100,000 batteries - be available, with rebates, $2,000 subsidies to 100,000 Australian households who earn less than $180,000 dollars. There's two million Australian households, or very close to two million Australian households, who have solar on the rooftops. They like it, they see that it gives them the opportunity for cheaper energy. We want to help bridge the gap by providing more batteries.

JOURNALIST: So is the Labor Party against the opening of more coal mines in Australia?

SHORTEN: Well I don't deal in hypotheticals. We certainly are sceptical about the Adani development in the Galilee Basin. You know, that's had plenty of false starts. I think initially when Adani and their backers trumpeted their arrival, they said there would be 10,000 jobs. That's now whittled down to less than 1,000 direct jobs. Adani I think initially said they wanted a 60 million tonne mine. Now that's down to a 10 million tonne mine. So we'll take each case based upon its merits, whether or not it qualifies for the environmental and scientific approvals.

JOURNALIST: My colleagues at Sky would like to know what your view is on encryption and the plans to allow interception?

SHORTEN: What's my view on encryption?

JOURNALIST: Sky have asked for you to express the position on the Government's view to make it easy for the security services to access encrypted messaging apps?

SHORTEN: Well, what we do with all of the proposals on national security is we work through them in a principally bipartisan way. I've worked with Prime Minister Tony Abbott, which was you know, not everyone could do, and I've worked with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull on national security. What we do is that when the Government says we need to update our laws, and they've said that on about 15 occasions, we send it to a parliamentary committee of experts. We hear all the third parties, we get all the experts and we say is this law as it's initially drafted, correct, or does it need to make improvements because the first draft had unintended consequences, or created new problems or didn't solve the problems it said it was seeking to do. So I take a very steadied parliamentary democracy approach to this. We work through the issues and we make sure we get them right. I just say to the current government, they want to rush this legislation through. Quite often when you rush legislation, you get it wrong. There's been evidence given today in public hearings which has expressed concerns about the initial form of the bill. We'll keep working through to make sure that whatever law we do arrive at works. No point in passing a law which doesn't work. No point in passing a law which leaves the back door open for Russian hackers to come in. No point leaving a law open or passed which then creates difficulties with our allies. So we'll work through the issues. Australians should be rest assured that my record over five years and three Liberal Prime Ministers, is we get it right the first time, we get it right the first time by making sure we cross our Ts and dot our Is.

JOURNALIST: And you've probably been asked a thousand times, was it fair for the ABC to sack Michelle Guthrie?

SHORTEN: Wherever you look in this government, instability is the order of the day. I think most of us are shocked that in a billion dollar institution, which the government has oversights, that you've got this sort of vendetta. You know, this sort of  rival vendetta, faction approach. I think the board of the ABC has got questions to answer. Either they knew what was going on and did nothing, or they didn't know what was going on and you have to ask the question why didn't you know? And as for the government, I mean what sort of ramshackle outfit are they running. When you've got a billion dollar national public broadcaster clearly with deep divisions, and all - they seem to be oblivious to the instability. But I can only assume it's because the government's been distracted by their own constant disunity, division, dysfunction and chaos. Thanks everybody, thanks for coming today.
FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Labor landslide on Saturday will have federal implications. A number of Victorian seats held by Morrison Government MPs are now at risk despite Scott Ryan's confidence. And Scott Ryan has made way for the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten in our Parliament House studio. Bill Shorten, welcome back to Breakfast.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, Fran.

KELLY: Well, the Liberals have been belted in Victoria and today's Newspoll has Federal Labor 10 points ahead of the Coalition. This next federal election impossible to lose from here?

SHORTEN: I certainly don't think the outcome of the next election is at all decided. That will be decided by 15 or 16 million voters whenever the Government finally call an election. In the meantime, full credit to Dan Andrews. Nothing should take away from him and his team in Victoria. I know there's plenty of discussion about lessons for the Liberal Party nationally which I'll come to in a moment in our chat I imagine, but full credit to Dan Andrews and his team. They've done a great job and they've been rewarded with a second term.

KELLY: There are a number of Liberal held federal seats that could now be in play. Is that your view of it? Corangamite, Chisholm, Deakin, Dunkley - those kind of seats - maybe even Flinders and Casey.

SHORTEN: Well there's no doubt that there's lessons federally and you've mentioned a whole range of seats where there was a significant swing to Labor. There was a strong swing to Labor even in my own seat. I think Footscray, there was a 15 per cent swing. It's a Victoria-wide thing. So I do think that Labor is competitive at the next election in a whole range of Victorian seats. But for me, the lesson from Victoria is focus on better schools and better hospitals not cuts and chaos and division. What people want is positive plans for the future not negative infighting. What I heard on Saturday when I was handing out in a range of seats and I heard right throughout the state campaign, is people coming up to me, people say, I'm a swinging voter or I might have voted Liberal for Malcolm Turnbull, we're just sick of the division. You know for me, it just reinforces the wisdom of Labor in the last five plus years at the national level focusing on being united and consistent, focus on policies not personalities.

KELLY: Well those very promises that you just ran off there, that Daniel Andrews was promising, you know spending on schools and hospitals - we heard the Federal Treasurer on AM suggest that obviously the Federal Coalition is going to have to counter that kind of campaign, that kind of spending. They've now got plenty of money in the coffers we're reading. Are you concerned you might be outspent in this upcoming federal election and that will blunt any promises you have to make on schools and education - on schools and hospitals?
SHORTEN: Well I think the Government's got to work out which critique it's making of Labor: Do we spend too much or we won't spend enough? The reality is for me, it's not - I don't view education and health -

KELLY: Big spending, higher taxing, aren't you? That's according to the Government.

SHORTEN: Yeah, I don't know where the Government thinks they get the money they spend from. They don't just magic it up through their sheer genius. You know, they're saying they're getting higher tax revenues and that's how they're going to pay for their promises. But for me, I don't view education and health as a poll-sweetener, as some sort of political strategy. I want to see our kids get the best start in life. That's why we've already been leading the debate about properly funding our schools. We've been leading the debate, despite the Government's attack of us for doing that - you know that Liberal line 'more money doesn't help'? We've been proposing universal preschool for three and four year olds, we're going to uncap university places, we're going to make sure that we pay the upfront fees for 100,000 TAFE places. So for me, education isn't a political strategy, it's a nation building strategy. It's a it's a inter-generational strategy of handing on a better deal to the next generation. So yes sure, if the Government want to contest us on who's got the best health policies and education policies, and negative gearing policies, and clean energy policies and cheaper energy policies - I just want to have a debate about ideas. People want us -

KELLY: Ok.

SHORTEN: That's where the political debate should be - the best ideas

KELLY:  I want to come back to the Budget and how that might play out in a moment but in terms of ideas - there are already calls coming from within the Liberal Party for them to be less ideological on social issues and challenges such as climate change. We heard Scott Ryan say that they need to get their tone - change their tone so the Liberal electoral base doesn't feel excluded. Do you think Scott Morrison will heed these calls and that could lead, for instance the Government resurrecting the National Energy Guarantee or moving - changing energy policy. Is that what you see in the future there?

SHORTEN: Well, I've known Scott Ryan for some period of time. He is a very sort of sensible considered Liberal. And for him to say that you know, in a sort of gentle way, the Liberal Party has got to be less right wing - he's right. I think this nation needs less ideology and more outcomes. So in terms of working together, we've made it clear we've got an invitation to the Government that we'll work with them on the National Energy Guarantee. This week I'd like to see the Government support our and the crossbench push for a national anti-corruption commission. I heard Scott Morrison saying in an interview that there's got to more compromise. Well I'm from the tradition which is you do compromise. You know where you want to go as a nation. You want to see a fair go for all but you've got to work with all sides of politics. The problem is that the Government is that - the modern Liberal Party has lost the ability to say anything except no. And this is because of a real problem they have within their ranks that the right wing half of the Liberal Party say no on climate change, they're saying no on anti-corruption commissions, they're saying no on properly funding our schools, they're saying no on terms of reform of our taxation system. And because half of the Government says no, then the whole Government has to say no because they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and can't afford any more division. I mean a lot of people still came up to me on Saturday and said, why isn't Malcolm Turnbull still the Prime Minister? And the Government's never answered that question satisfactorily, have they?

KELLY:  You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is Opposition Leader Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten, the Parliamentary calendar for next year should be released this week. It's expected to show that the Budget will be brought forward to late March or early April meaning the federal election would be in late May - we would think. What's your view on that?

SHORTEN: Well I think this is a Government to be honest, who have stopped governing. They view everything through the prism of beating Labor and winning the election. Now, that's part of what governments do - I'm not naive. But there are big issues which the nation needs dealt with now. We should resolve a national anti-corruption commission this week. We should get that process going. We should be in a position where we can resolve a National Energy Guarantee. All I did last week with Mark Butler and Chris Bowen, in large part is say to the Government we'll work with what you've already voted to endorse. But this Government - I don't know. Like, they're so sort of obsessed by climate change its vaguely weird that they can't actually accept the science. What will drive down lower power prices is policy certainty. Everyone knows that we've got to take action on climate change; business, unions, the scientists,  the community. Two million Australians - householders who've got solar on their roofs yet we can't get policy certainty which is absolutely crippling new investment in energy generation. Sure we want to do well at the next election - absolutely. But there are issues which we shouldn't have to wait for to resolve and we can do in the life of this Parliament; anti-corruption commission and energy being two of them which come to mind this week.

KELLY: As we just heard on AM, Josh Frydenberg is going after your policies. There is an election. We now know it will be in May almost certainly. They're particularly going after not just negative gearing changes, but today Labor's plan to scrap tax refunds on dividend imputations. They've published an analysis that finds almost half of those affected will be over 65 which he says would place a heavier load on the aged pension. And the Treasurer has got a new line against Labor: it says you want to impose a retiree tax. It's pretty tough line to counter, isn't it?

SHORTEN: It's not even true so it's not that tough to counter. If we stop -

KELLY: Well, they've got a whole lot of analysis that says 300,000 voters in Labor electorates will be hit.

SHORTEN: Well, let's go back to what you said. You were repeating Josh's line which says it's some sort of retiree impost. If you don't pay someone a payment, if you withdraw a government subsidy, that is not a new tax - it just means you're not handing out a subsidy. Dividend imputation was invented in 1987, whereby if people got dividends from companies rather than be taxed twice - in other words, the money's taxed within the company and then it is treated as income tax. What Keating said, is that you shouldn't pay two lots of tax - income tax and tax through the company on your shares. But what Mr Howard did in 2001, is he said even if you don't pay any income tax, we'll give you money back because you own the share. The idea that this nation can afford to hand out billions of dollars to people merely because they own shares is not a sustainable idea. And again, it's a bit like the way we want to reform other measures. We've got to get this country's books on a sustainable long-term footing. I'm concerned that we have 120,000 older Australians who are diagnosed as needing aged care packages and can't get them. We are going to have a royal commission into aged care because of the underfunding of aged care. Government is about making choices: I choose to invest in schools and hospitals, reducing the aged care waiting list, making sure people can get apprenticeships, making sure that we can reduce the out-of-pocket costs in Medicare. It's all about choices and you know, we're up for the legitimate debate. Now if Mr Frydenberg wants to call us names, that's up to him. It didn't help him in Victoria.

KELLY: You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is Opposition Leader Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten, the Government is clearly very vulnerable as it limps to Christmas. Kerryn Phelps gets sworn in as the Independent Member for Wentworth this morning. That makes it official - the Government's in minority. Is Labor going to try to exploit and test that over the next two weeks? I mean, there's now doubt over Peter Dutton's eligibility to sit in parliament - that's thrown doubt over 16,000 visa cancellations since the last election. Is Labor going to try and pursue this?

SHORTEN: We want to try and get things done in the Parliament - that's why we're going to keep pushing for a national anti-corruption commission. Labor supports having a national anti-corruption commission. We would like to see more done to reduce energy prices and we're willing to support a National Energy Guarantee. On Mr Dutton, I've just seen this morning before I came into this radio interview, breaking news that lawyers representing people who Mr. Dutton is trying to throw out of Australia, are using the cloud over Mr. Dutton's constitutional eligibility to be in Parliament to protect their clients. This just shows you that the circus has become a farce with serious concern.
KELLY: So what's Labor going to do about that? Are you going to try pursue that in Parliament?

SHORTEN: Do you know what? I think Mr Dutton should refer himself.

KELLY: And if you doesn't, will you?

SHORTEN:  Well, you know and I know, Fran, that if we don't have the numbers, it can't be done. But what that means in the meantime is that we're jeopardising the authority's cases against 16,000 people - many of whom are alleged to be criminals from us being able to take action. I think it's, you know, this is a problem not of Labor's making. Mr Dutton needs to resolve the cloud. Now, he'll probably get up and yell and you know, carry on and attack Labor. It's the lawyers of the people that the authorities are trying to take action on who are using the cloud over Mr. Dutton's eligibility to save their clients -

KELLY: So, will you try and push this?

SHORTEN:  I think, Fran, is this the way we want immigration laws and strong borders being made by people whose constitutional eligibility has a cloud over it?

KELLY: Ok, just finally -

SHORTEN: How does that help keep us safe and strong?
KELLY: Bill Shorten, we've only got a minute to the news. Just finally, the latest Newspoll has Labor improving its lead, stretching its lead over the Government but not so on your standing. Scott Morrison is still outranking you in preferred Prime Minister. Why?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, you know that when the polls are good or bad, over five years, one month and 13 days, I haven't commented. I'm not going to start doing that now.

KELLY: But in all that time you haven't been preferred leader hardly at all, have you?

SHORTEN: Well no, Fran, what I'm not going to do is engage in that debate. But what I'll say to you, Fran, is if the Liberal Party thinks that on Monday, as we approach the last two weeks of Parliament, they're doing really well - well then, I've got a bridge over the mouth of Yarra I want to sell 'em.

KELLY: Bill Shorten, thank you very much for joining us.

GILBERT: Our top story this morning the fall out of the Victorian election, joining us now is the most senior figure in the Labor Party from Victoria, Bill Shorten the Opposition Leader. Mr Shorten thanks so much for your time, what do you say to members of the Government who are questioning whether there are federal issues at play in the result at the weekend?

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well first of all I must say congratulations to Dan Andrews and his team, it's his win, it's Victorian Labor's win. I was handing out on Saturday, I live in Victoria, I campaigned in the state election, if the Federal Liberal Party believe that there's no message for the Liberal brand in Australia well that's up to them. How they sort of do the post mortem and the recriminations, I'm not going to get involved in, but what I saw on Saturday is what I've seen all around Australia, better schools and better hospitals trumps cuts and chaos and division. What I heard on Saturday as I was handing out in the suburbs of Melbourne, people saying they are sick of the division in the Liberal Party they just want some continuity, some stability – they also want long term vision. So the message I've taken from Victoria is a positive one, stick to the policies, stick to looking after the people, stay united and stable as we have for over five years and people will reward you.

JAYES: Dan Andrews was claiming the mantle of the most progressive Government in Australia, is that something you would like to be able to claim if you win?

SHORTEN: We're certainly more progressive than the current government in Canberra. Listen, I'll let our actions speak for ourselves rather than me put tags on how we will be as a government, my aim is to get elected first but what I can promise Australians is for example, if you've got a three or four year old we'll make sure they get access to kindergarten for free. We'll make sure we reduce the waiting lists for aged care, I want first home buyers when they go to the auctions on a Saturday to be able to compete on a level playing field, we want to get the energy prices down and we want to get wages moving. So we're going to let our actions speak for themselves, that's what people want these days – less rhetoric and more just get on with the job.

GILBERT: The lead now you've got in the Newspoll is ten points, the result in the Wentworth by-election was diabolical for the Government, this result in Victoria it's yours to lose now isn't it, this election, a hundred per cent.

SHORTEN: Well Mr Morrison will have to call an election in the next five months, they have to. What we're going to do is take nothing for granted, the people haven't voted yet. I noticed the Government saying – assuming that we think we are going to win, I don't have that view. People come up to me in the street and they say take a long holiday, go on a cruise you know, it's in the bag - I don't have that view for two reasons. One, the people haven't decided and it would be arrogant to take that and two, I actually think what people want is policy strength, ideas - what are we going to do for the people. So we're going to keep sticking to our plan, roll out the ideas. We announced batteries for households, two million households have got solar panels we just want to get people to get control of power prices.

JAYES: Daniel Andrews had a big spending agenda, do you recognise that there is a difference between state and federal sphere in that, do you have to have more fiscal responsibility in that sense and where is that in your list of priorities?

SHORTEN: Fiscal responsibility is important, I don't accept the Liberal argument that somehow Dan Andrews isn't fiscally responsible, they've made some very strong decisions. But we've been making hard economic reforms, my economic team of Chris Bowen and Jim Chalmers and the others, we've been making serious economic reform proposals to explain how we pay for our changes. We've lead the debate about reforming the taxation of multinationals who don't pay their fair share in Australia, we've made it clear that we want to wind back unsustainable tax concessions. So every promise we make, we can pay for plus more because we understand that what matters in politics is to hand on a better deal to the next generation, that includes making sure we don't have national debt ballooning, it's doubled under the Liberals.

GILBERT: It looks like the Treasurer, Mr Frydenberg will go to a Budget in April, election in May, many of them see this as their last roll of the dice - to deliver a surplus and say look we're the economic guardians. How do you respond to that?

SHORTEN: Well, if they have a surplus we think this is a good thing but it's because there's increased taxation on companies. The Government can take some pleasure from the surplus but the reason why we will have a surplus is because Australian corporations are paying more company tax.

JAYES: What's the problem with that?

SHORTEN: Nothing at all, all I'm saying is that when we talk about fiscal management what happens in Australia is that it's not the politicians who drive for good fiscal outcomes in Australia it is the companies, it's the people who go to work. My concern is that in Australia at the moment whilst we've got good corporate profits and that's why we have the surplus, what we don't have is proper wages movement in this country. Corporate profits are increasing by ten per cent, wages by two per cent. Too many ordinary Australians are missing out on wage rises they're dipping into the family savings, they're living on the family credit card just to pay the ordinary outgoing expenses of weekly life in this country.

JAYES: Daniel Andrews' mantra was 'getting things done' and he's able to do that now because Labor controls both Houses in Victoria, you might not be so lucky. How do you propose to deal with the Senate if you are Prime Minister? Will you be pragmatic, will you negotiate with the right and the left, how will that work under your Prime Ministership?

SHORTEN: It will work cooperatively and constructively. I always had the view, back from my days representing workers in negotiations with employers, that no one has got a monopoly on having all the good ideas. The sort of leader I'd be if I was Prime Minister is I'll work with the crossbench and I'll work with the Liberal opposition if I was Prime Minister. What this country needs is for us to work together more, that's why I'm proposing this week to work with Mr Morrison on a National Integrity Commission. Most people don't understand why the current Prime Minister has never publically gone on the record backing an anti-corruption commission at the national level, let's work together. On the energy policy, we've offered to pick up the National Energy Guarantee which as you would know, was championed by Mr Turnbull, Mr Frydenberg and Mr Morrison.

JAYES: But why didn't you do that when Malcolm Turnbull was Prime Minister?

SHORTEN: Well he couldn't even bring it to the Parliament.
JAYES: But why didn't you agree to it? The National Energy Guarantee framework was all there.
SHORTEN: Yeah you're right, we did want to see it but the problem is Mr Turnbull couldn't even bring it to the Parliament and we encouraged him to, we thought this was a good thing to do but this is the big problem in Australia and I didn't want to talk too much about my opponents. But the Liberal Party in Australia has lost the ability to say anything other than no. You know, they've got that right-wing half they're against climate change, energy, lower energy bills and tackling climate change, they say no then the Liberal Party has got to say no because they don't want to look more divided then they already are and nothing happens in Australia. I think we saw on Saturday the frustration with do nothing negativity.

GILBERT: And do you feel emboldened by the result in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne? I guess everywhere in Victoria in relation to your position on climate change and your Emission Reduction Targets and so on, is that reflective of a broader view nationwide?

SHORTEN: I think the nation is sick and tired after ten years of arguing about climate change that we just don't get on with it. Energy prices have just gone up and up and up, in Sydney, 26 per cent on average nationally, 19 per cent. You see a lot of businesses in Australia are struggling under the weight of massive gas price increases. So something's got to give and this constant opposition to taking real action on climate change, this sort of zealot almost anti-science attitude part of the Liberal Party has meant that there's been no policy certainty which means there can be no new investment in new energy generation and if there's not new energy generation, prices go up.

GILBERT: And just one related question on that, Adani, have you got a definitive position on that yet in terms of when you will back it or you won't?

SHORTEN: We've said that we don't want to see any Commonwealth tax-payer money directly or indirectly go into it, we've seen the missed deadlines, we're sceptics. We've said no taxpayer money should be used in this proposition.

JAYES: That's essentially fence sitting though, isn't it?

SHORTEN: Not at all, it depends if you want federal tax money or not.

JAYES: Okay, Bill Shorten well it's good to see you in the mothership in Canberra-

SHORTEN: Wow.

JAYES: Will we see you again –

GILBERT: You like it?

JAYES: - during the election campaign back on First Edition?

SHORTEN: Yeah, sure.

JAYES: You've enjoyed yourself then?

SHORTEN: I always enjoy talking to you guys.

JAYES: Thanks.

GILBERT: Cheers.

