INTERVIEWER:  It’s wonderful to welcome the Prime Minister Scott Morrison live in the studio. Welcome to the programme how are you doing?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m doing great Fairsy and thanks for having us in here today. It’s great to be back in Launie.

INTERVIEWER: It’s nice to see you down here. Let me ask you off the top, hey, you’ve really got in and met some of the locals, including I believe one of my favourite places, Sporties last night? Is that true?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, we were at Sporties last night with Johnsy who cleaned me up on the pool table, he’s a bit of a local legend there as I understand. It was great to spend some time there last night, just chatting with people with Bridget Archer, our Liberal candidate here in Bass. But I also got down to do my laps yesterday at the Launceston Aquatic Centre and so a big cheer to all the kids out there at the South Esk Swimming Club, the national swimming club of the year back in 2015, they proudly proclaimed. So it was nice to meet all of them, you guys keep swimming. A lot of local champions down there at that pool.

INTERVIEWER: Ariarne Titmus of course, a Tasmanian local really kicking serious backside nationally and internationally too now, which is wonderful. Alright Prime Minister, there’s a lot to get through and I know your time is tight and I really appreciate you popping in.

But let’s start off with Bass, starting off with Bass because obviously to retain power this is one of the seats that you’re going to have to win. A recent poll showed it was neck-and-neck, so that gives you a lot of heart. Announcement-wise with the election, May 18 is being thrown around. Now that’s going to put me out because that’s when my charity fundraiser is. So thank you with that today, but is that the date that you’ve decided on?

PRIME MINISTER: People won’t have to wait too long to find out. But obviously, there were three dates, the 11th, 18th and 25th  and those options are now narrowing, so I don’t think people will have to wait too much longer. Yeah, the election will be in May and we’ll call that in the not too distant future.

But here in Bass, I mean, the number one stand-out reason for supporting us here is Bridget Archer. She is a first-class candidate, she has been great over there as a local Mayor and I think that she’s really going to bring a lot to the job. She’s got a great heart and passion, she’s a mum raising a lot of kids. She’s really juggling and doing it all and I’m just thrilled to have her in my team. But we’re backing her up with great policies. The thing I love about coming down to Launceston more recently, particularly over the last few years, has been just how positive people are. I mean the northern Tasmanian economy has really, really turned around.

INTERVIEWER: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: And you can just feel it. I mean just talking to people at Sporties last night, talking to local tradies, talking to people in the building and civil construction industry. I met a couple last night that has moved down from Melbourne, they’re working down here and I’m sure they’ll start a family here. These are the choices people are making about northern Tasmania and what is making it happen is the strength of the economy and the great partnership I think, that we’ve formed here with Will Hodgman. The State Government, the Commonwealth Government, working together to get people into trades, to get the projects moving. We’ve got to keep this going and I just found the optimism here the last few years, coming down here, intoxicating. It’s tremendous.

INTERVIEWER: I totally agree with you Prime Minister on that for sure. There are a lot of concerns as we know, health being one of them. Now you’re announcing or going to announce today I believe, a $92 million package?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah that’s right. It’s going to focus on elective surgery, it’s going to focus on mental health care, maternity services, breast cancer diagnoses. These are the priority issues and its’s a range of initiatives. A new birthing suite here at the Launceston Hospital, further across the north we’ve got a new linear accelerator machine at Burnie, that’s so breast cancer patients will save $1,500 on MRIs and PET scans that are now covered by Medicare. We’ve got $4.5 million going into cancer infrastructure. We’ve got an additional 6,000 surgeries and endoscopies that are going to be provided under a $20 million services and infrastructure plan. There’s going to be here a new adult mental health centre here in Launceston and mental health is a huge priority for me. Many people will know in the Budget - and if you didn’t then this will be good news for you - $461 million is being invested in tackling youth suicide and the youth mental health challenge in this country. It’s the biggest package of measures a Government has ever handed down to really take on these issues.

Greg Hunt is here with me today in Launceston and he’s really been championing that cause. More Headspace centres around the country, we made announcements last year for more Headspace centres and we do know that turns things around for young people. So we’re going to keep investing in the mental health of our nation, starting with our youngest, but all the way through. As I said, a mental health centre here and we’re also going to have one treating eating disorders, which is another priority. I mean, I’m a parent and what parent with kids going into teenage years - or even sadly sooner now - isn’t that just your worst nightmare? So together, we can confront all that.

But you can’t do it unless you’ve got a strong economy and that’s what is so exciting about northern Tasmania. It’s economy is going forward and we’ve got to keep that going.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, one thing, looking at this in a nutshell; aged care. We’re an ageing population, it’s a sector that I believe from personal experience is drastically underfunded. There is so much that needs to be done there and well, what about that? I mean, are there plans in place for that or are we focusing on that?

PRIME MINISTER:  The Government has been putting a $1 billion extra into aged care every single year, $1 billion extra. We do have an ageing population and a priority for us particularly over the last 18 months has been has been in-home care places.

Now we’ve put in another 40,000, including the most recent announcement in the Budget, for in-home care places. What that does is two things; the first thing it does is preserve the choices of Australians as they age. They can stay at home. That’s where so many of them want to choose to be so you can be there for the grandkids birthdays, you know, people can still come round, you can stay in touch with your friends, be in your community. This is what people want and we’re doing that with the in-home care places. We’ll continue to invest $1 billion every year.

Of course there’s the Aged Care Royal Commission that I announced last year and that is to confront the challenges that we do have in the aged care system and we need to build that culture of respect for older Australians, not just in our aged care system but more broadly.

INTERVIEWER:  Prime Minister, cost of living. In a recent poll, it’s come out on top as the key election issue. It’s a massive problem and down here a lot of Tasmanians are struggling, battling to make ends meet and it’s getting worse and worse. I notice, one of your ideas and plans was a feasibility study in the Basslink Connector for example, with the Battery of Nation type scenario. So with investment like that, is this something where that sort of thing can turn around and become cheaper and stuff? But that’s a long way off, what about Tasmanians that are battling today?

PRIME MINISTER: Tax cuts, that’s what. We’ve already legislated our first tranche last year and we’ve taken more tax cuts for this year. I mean NATSEM the independent economic modeller has already said that someone on average full time wage will be $1,000 better off under our plan, than under Labor’s plan.

We believe that people should keep more of what they earn. Labor believes they should increase taxes by $200bn over the next 10 years.

Then there’s their emissions reduction policies that they can’t even explain, about how much that will increase costs. If Bill Shorten can’t tell you what his vehicle emissions standards - his car tax - is going to cost you, for the car that he’s going to make you buy, then don’t vote for him. If he can’t explain it, if he doesn’t understand it, how does he expect you to understand it? And he wants you to vote for him.

On cost of living issues, because of Labor’s reckless emissions targets - I mean, we’ve got our target, it’s 26 per cent and we’ll meet it just like we met our Kyoto 2020, we take this issue seriously. But Bill’s policy, he can’t even explain what it’s going to cost you. I mean in that policy, businesses are going to have to spend $35 billion to $36 billion buying international carbon credits from goodness know where overseas. It’s just $36 billion going out the door and for what? That’s $36 billion that could be invested in higher wages, investing in companies, growing their markets, putting new investment into their businesses. He’s just going to put this enormous slug on our economy and it’ll slow it down. The northern Tasmanian economy is getting ahead, forestry industries, tourism industries, we passionately support these and you’ve mentioned the Marinus Link. I mean this is a big project for Tasmania’s future; $56 million to get the planning phase of that underway and done, so we can get in and invest in having that Link put in.

Yesterday we announced $17 million for a skills package for Tasmania, specifically to ensure that Tasmania is battery-ready, with the skills they will need to deliver on that project. So we announced that yesterday and I think that it’s great to get those Tasmanians with the skills they’ll need to ensure that we can deliver on that massive Battery of the Nation project that Will Hodgman and I are just so excited about.

INTERVIEWER:  Prime Minister, I did ask my listeners to submit questions.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure

INTERVIEWER: Just to put to you to get a response from you and I know that time is flying, so I’ll keep it as short as possible. One of them is talking about the NDIS. Now this listener applied for it in January, was told it could be accessed by February, yet still no response, still waiting to hear back. She’s provided all the necessary paperwork and documents and can’t access the help she needs. She’s very, very ill and that’s just one. The NDIS is very a big issue.

PRIME MINISTER: The NDIS is a massive social programme, it’s the biggest change since Medicare. We’ve got 10,000 people, 10,000 people working either within the NDIA or ancillary services working to solve all of those problems. We’ve got over 70,000 people accessing services that never did before and so this is just a very big project. Yes, we agree, it’s a very hard programme to implement and we’re going to keep on making it better year on year on year on year. But I make you this absolute commitment - and it’s not just a commitment, it’s in the Budget and it’s fully funded; the NDIS will get every cent that it needs. It’s a completely demand-driven program and we’ll see that demand increase. It already has been at record levels and it’ll continue to grow.

Just last week I announced the Royal Commission into disabilities, to address very similar issues that we’ve seen in the Aged Care sector. People with disabilities experienced some horrendous things and we’re going to shine a light on that. I think that will also improve the culture of respect, whether it’s in the workplace, whether it’s in healthcare, whether it’s in any part of our society. For people living with disabilities, we’ve got to make their life easier and we recognise the contribution they want to make and we’re going to facilitate that. We’re 100 per cent committed to it, it’s a very difficult programme and we’re getting on with it and we’ve got a lot pf people working on it.

INTERVIEWER:  Prime Minister bulk-billing, that’s another one. There’s basically no bulk-billing doctors here in Launceston and in fact probably across northern Tasmania. Hardly any, which is a real issue because a lot of people cannot afford to pay to see the doctor.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we have record bulk-billing rates right across the country.

INTERVIEWER: Not here

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it’s bulk-billing right across the country and including right across northern Tasmania that we’re achieving these rates, that’s the information that I have. We’re achieving those bulk billing records.

Medicare has never been stronger under our Government. We have increased funding to Medicare by 27 per cent and the Medicare Guarantee fund continues to put in tens of billion in every year. So we’re delivering on that and we’ll continue to deliver on it.

INTERVIEWER:  So there’s no issue with bulk-billing in your opinion?

PRIME MINISTER:  What I’m saying is we’ll continue to ensure that we deliver on this. It’s always going to be a challenge around the country, but what I’m saying is, at the last election, Bill Shorten said that we were going to sell Medicare. I mean it was an outrageous lie. This is what you’ll hear from Labor at this election; you’ll hear lies and higher taxes. That’s what Labor is offering at this election. Lies about what the Government is doing, not telling you the truth about the higher cost-of-living that you will face under their higher taxes and their reckless emission targets. Which means that you will pay for more for everything, whether it’s your car, whether it’s your electricity bill, whether it’s your private health insurance. Whatever you have to pay for, it’ll cost more under Labor.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister very quickly, this is another question. Daniel thanks for this one; “When the Libs took power 6 years ago they were claiming a budget crisis when the debt was around $250 billion. Now the debts is more than double in your time, but it’s not a crisis, when you’ve promised that you would not increase it?”

PRIME MINISTER: Well, when you’re in deficit your debt goes up and it has taken us the last 6 years to get the Budget out of deficit and get it back into surplus. I mean that was the legacy the Labor Party they left us.

When we came into Government debt was growing at 30 per cent every year. That’s stopped now. What we’re seeing now is, over the next four years, we will reduce the net debt of the country by $50 billion or just shy of that. That’s what happens, you get the Budget back in the black, which we’re now in. And it’s a reminder; last time the government of the nation went to the Labor Party back in 2007, we went from a $20 billion surplus to a $27 billion deficit in the space of one year. We have been paying that back ever since. It has taken us more than a decade to get the budget back into surplus. It just goes to show; you vote Labor once, you pay for it for a decade. That’s what it means when it comes to the economic management of the Labor Party and I think Australians understand that.

They have had too many goes at managing the nation’s finances and they’ve stuffed it up too many times I think, for people to give them any credit that they know how to manage money. And if you can’t manage money, you can’t pay for Medicare, you can’t pay for hospitals. You can make all the promises you like, but when you look in the wallet, it’s empty.

And you know what Labor does when their wallet is empty? They go and look in yours. That’s why they increase taxes on all Australians.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister in saying that, in the polls it shows  if an election was held now you’d be wiped out. The only shining light is your popularity, obviously  over Bill Shorten as preferred Prime Minister. What, this is your opportunity to very quickly  say why you deserve, because you’ve had the revolving door of Prime Ministers, you’ve had total disasters, you’ve had in-fighting, you’ve acted like infants,  school kids a lot of the time with all this battle and stuff. So why should people give you another chance and vote you back into power?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think it’s pretty clear since we’ve come to Government, we’ve got the Budget  back into surplus. We’ve reduced unemployment to levels we’ve not seen in a decade. We’ve created jobs particularly for young people and our economy is moving forward. As I said, here in northern Tasmania it really is a strong economy, it’s central to everything. The IMF today is talking about a such more difficult global environment. Now is not the time to hand the economic wheel over someone in Bill Shorten, who doesn’t know how to drive an economy. That is what will put your future at risk. That is what will determine your ability to deal  with cost of living pressures, a Government that knows how to run the economy, knows how to manage finances, versus and Opposition that every  time they’ve been in government, they’ve  always stuffed it up, when it comes to programs and the  Budget. You can’t get the healthcare you need, if you don’t have a government that knows how to manage money. Now, we’ve demonstrated that and the record speaks for that.

I think Australians are focused on the future and they’re focused on who is best able to deliver that strong economy and strong Budget that can invest and guarantee the funding for the essentials services they rely on. That’s the Liberal and National parties, that’s who it is.  Our record is there and they know they can trust it, they’ve seen it here with Will at a state level and they’ve seen it with us at a Commonwealth level. If you want to keep that going here in northern Tasmania, well the way to do that is to keep the ScoMo and Will show going.

INTERVIEWER: Alright well Prime Minister Scott Morrison thank you so much for your time, really appreciate you dropping in.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Michaelia. This is part of our plan for a stronger economy. Australia is the best place to live and to raise a family, but our future depends on ensuring we continue to build our economy - to secure our future and to guarantee the essential services that Australians rely on. The health system here in Tasmania is dependent on a strong economy.

Higher taxes don’t solve that problem, that just slows the economy down and means you’re not in a position to fund affordable medicines and things like that in the future. Higher taxes has never been the answer to any problem. The answer to ensuring we can deliver the health services, the education, the things Tasmanians rely on, is for Tasmania to stay on the great path it’s on under the Hodgman Government, that is making their economy strong and is going well. We are backing them in, it’s a great partnership.

INTERVIEWER: Is this dependent on the federal election result?

PRIME MINISTER: This is in the Budget, this is in the Budget papers and the funding is there. The only risk to this would be a Labor government that would reverse it. But this is a decision that has been taken and it’s in the Budget that was handed down last week.

INTERVIEWER: These funds will only be available for people wanting to go into specific skills, it won’t be for all trades?

PRIME MINISTER: The Skilling Australians Fund – Michaelia might want to speak to this as well – that is already funding the additional training arrangements for the traditional skills and things like that. On top of that, we also have the apprenticeship program we announced, the half a billion dollar skills package in the Budget last week, which goes to a range of different apprenticeships which will also, I think, be of great input here in Tasmania. But what we’re announcing today goes above and beyond that. It goes to these broader-ranging skills and to ensure there’s zero fee participation and to ensure we can invest and recruit those Tasmanians to come and be part of making these great projects a reality.

INTERVIEWER: What skills specifically are they for Tasmania, that are lacking here?

PRIME MINISTER: It’s a very customised plan. We have a plan to keep our economy strong and we have a plan to keep the Tasmanian economy strong. We have a Tasmanian economy plan of which this is a key component. The Battery of the Nation is a very important part of Tasmania’s future, particularly for northern Tasmania. But not only that, it’s about keeping our traditional industries strong. It wasn’t that long ago we were here together, talking about what we were going to do with our forestry industry up here in northern Tasmania. So we have a very clear plan to keep the Tasmanian economy strong and I could not hope for a better partner in achieving that than the Premier Will Hodgman.

INTERVIEWER: [Inaudible] allocated for a second interconnector?

PRIME MINISTER: Well this is what the business case does. The business case, we wouldn’t be doing the business case on the second interconnector, if we weren’t serious about actually following through and implementing that. What the interconnector business case already - from the work that has been done, - indicates is that it will be a very viable project. But it’s the ‘how and where and at what scale’ and the financing structures that can be used to bring it about and ultimately the participation of other partners, that make it a reality.

But this project will be a goer. It’ll be a goer and will benefit not only Tasmania, it will be a project that benefits all of Australia. I mean Tasmania will be charging up the rest of the nation, Tasmania will be making a contribution here to the rest of the economy. That’s why we’ve been settling those quite specific arrangements for how it would be structured and how the finance would be done, which means that those who would be benefitting from it, carry the financial cost.

INTERVIEWER: Mr Morrison I understand that [inaudible] the same [inaudible] so are you going to be funding that?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s the same answer to the question that was just put. We would not be doing the business case and putting investment into the Marinus Link project if we had no intention of then following through with a positive result. There are many different ways you can finance that and that’s what that business case will actually best identify, the best way we can make that project a reality. Because you’re right, it’s not just the hydro project. I mean, there’s are 400K in power just sitting there, which is not going anywhere. We need it to get across the Bass Strait, we need to it power up Victoria. If that would’ve been in place previously, Victoria would not have suffered the brownouts they did recently.

INTERVIEWER: Today’s announcement, you said you’d be having a discussion with the Tasmanian Government, so has Tas TAFE been involved in that?

PRIME MINISTER: That’ll be done by the Tasmanian Government, to the extent to which they’ll bring in other partners. That’s up to them, but really it’s about the industry. They’re the ones who are going to build it, Tasmanian Hydro is who we have to talk to through that process, to make sure we’re identifying the skills need. Now the company we’re standing with here today, they’ve already been involved in doing a lot of work with these hydro projects. They’re very familiar with these sites, whether it’s the businesses here or around the state, understanding the people they will need. In many cases, it’ll be people who already working for these company that need to do additional training in other areas, adding to their skillsets. So this really is about upgrading and everybody benefitting from this investment in their skills. We are investing in the people to build the projects, that’s what we’re doing here today, particularly in Tasmania.

INTERVIEWER: Just moving on Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: Before we go into other issues, we’re joined by some great people from VEC, so if we’re going to move to political issues, I won’t draw them into those things. So I want to thank you very much and good luck, thanks for joining us today. Or any questions for VEC?

INTERVIEWER: Can I just get a general comment, yeah, what do you think of today’s announcement, how will that help you in the skills shortage you face?

INTERVIEWER: What skills do you think Tasmania is lacking?

PRIME MINISTER: They’ll be working closely with us to identify those, thanks very much, thanks for being here. Okay other questions for the day.

INTERVIEWER:  Malcom Turnbull said you can’t wave off the revelations about Peter Dutton’s private [inaudible] as the bubble and the buck stops with you. What are you going to do?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I’ve spoken with Peter Dutton about this and there are no issues here that trouble me at all. I mean there’s no suggestion that Peter, in any way shape or form, has a sought or been provided with any benefit here. The individual we're talking about had his visa cancelled while he was out of the country, by Peter Dutton's Department. So if the object was foreign interference, well, the exact opposite is what has occurred.

Peter Dutton has been in the vanguard of ensuring that we’ve been putting foreign interference arrangements in place and in the Budget that we handed down last week, there was about $36 million which has been invested in the agencies that Peter Dutton has responsibility for, to counter foreign interference.

I think this is in stark contrast with the Labor Party and Senator Dastyari. Senator Dastyari, or former Senator Dastyari I should stress, had to resign in shame because he had been intoxicated by that interference. So if anyone has any questions to answer on this issue, it’s the Labor Party. The Liberal and National parties have actually put these arrangements in place. So no, I have no concerns and as a result I’m happy to move on.

INTERVIEWER: Have you sought an explanation from Mr Dutton?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I have and I’m very satisfied.

INTERVIEWER: About how he came to be in a lunchtime meeting with [inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: Members of Parliament have meetings with people all the time, the suggestion here is that something inappropriate was done. There’s no basis for that whatsoever, absolutely none. In fact, if you look at what actually has occurred in the Government's handling of this individual's case, we cancelled his visa. I mean, I don’t think that was a solution he was looking for, do you? He was seeking as I understand it, to try to gain citizenship in Australia. Our Government not only didn’t provide him with citizenship, we cancelled his visa so he cannot return to Australia. That was done by an agency under Mr Dutton's responsibility. So I think the actions here speak far louder and the actions here are that we’ve acted against foreign interference in this country. Not just by having the laws in place, but by acting on those laws and in last week’s Budget, by investing in the agencies which protect Australia from foreign interference.

By contrast the Labor Party, through the former Senator Sam Dastyari, took this same individual, put him in front of an Australian government logo and ran an ad for him. I mean that’s what I call foreign interference.

INTERVIEWER: So what do you make of Malcolm Turnbull’s advice then?

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t make anything of it.

INTERVIEWER: Was the Environment Minister ever pressured to get those Adani agreements done, will this free you up in your decision to call the election? And you’re a religious man, does Easter factor into any plans for an election date?

PRIME MINISTER: Let me say a couple of things about the last issue. On Easter Sunday and on Easter Friday and on Anzac Day, the Liberal and National parties won’t be running any political advertisements if we’re in an election campaign at that time.

I understand the Labor Party have said they won’t do it on Good Friday and Anzac Day as well and I think I welcome that. I would ask them to extend that to Easter Sunday. That’s sort of the whole point of the Christian Easter celebration, frankly, Easter Sunday. So I would welcome their support on that as well and I would expect they’d do that in good faith.

On the other matters that you raise, the Environment Minister has made a decision, as I said she would all along, based on the best environmental science advice. She has been waiting to receive that advice from Geoscience Australia and the CSIRO. Both of those organisations, together with the Department of Environment have made recommendations that this further matter that required consent from the Commonwealth, could be considered. She has made her decision on that, consistent absolutely with the environmental science advice and the scientific advice that has been provided by those agencies and her own Department.

Now I note that Mr Shorten is happy to say - while he’s up in central Queensland today - that he’s happy to abide also by the advice of the scientists. I’ll wait to see whether he says the same thing when he’s down in Victoria or elsewhere in the country. I’m not surprised he’d be happy to say that up in central Queensland. But when it comes to the Liberal and National parties, we’re happy to talk about our primary industries in the same way wherever we go around this country; we are for our primary industries, whether it’s in agriculture, forestry, fishing or mining. In all of these places, we know the jobs that they produce and we know that you need to continue to stand by these industries.

So I welcome the fact that Mr Shorten has said, Bill Shorten has said that he will be supporting that decision of consent. But let's see if he can say the same thing in Melbourne, as he says in Gladstone.

I know that the Environment Minister has conducted herself in the way you’d expect her to do, to go through, follow the process to the letter and make sure that before she made any decision, that she was completely satisfied and had all the information she believed she needed to make that decision. Which is exactly what she did and I know Melissa pretty well, she’s a pretty tough Western Australian.



PRIME MINISTER: I’ve got another tough Western Australian behind me and they just stay focused on what their job is and what their responsibilities and their accountabilities are. I want to thank Minister Price for the very good job she’s done in managing her responsibilities and exercising them the way she has. Thank you very much, everyone, great to be here.

INTERVIEWER: When are you going to call the election?

PRIME MINISTER: It’ll be in May, we’ll call it in April.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister Scott Morrison thanks for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Paul.

INTERVIEWER: This is a very natural couch setting that we’ve set up for you.

PRIME MINISTER: Welcome to my couch.

INTERVIEWER: Appreciate it. Just a couple of questions, I was planning to go to the footy on the 11th of May, the 18th of May or the 25th of May.

[Laughter]

Which ticket should I hand back?

PRIME MINISTER: I think you should go to the footy every opportunity you get.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, right okay.

PRIME MINISTER: That's my policy.

INTERVIEWER: What if there was a Saturday night going and I really had to cover an election? The 11th, the 18th, or the 25th?

PRIME MINISTER: Mate you can always do it from the stands, I think it’d go really well with the coverage. I think your viewers would love it.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, I was asking for Speersy and he just wants to know whether we can have a night off, is it the 11th, the 18th or the 25th?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: He can take his pick. Maybe he could decide and he can tell me.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, the reaction to the Budget seems to be pretty positive, but there's a couple of things that I wanted to jump into that aren’t as obvious a headline to everyone else. I think that regardless of who is Prime Minister or what Party is in power, I love that we live in a country that yesterday made a decision that leukemia drugs shouldn't cost $140,000, they should only cost $40. 

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, or even less on a concession that's right, $6.50. I agree. I think our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme - and we've had over 2,000 medicines now listed on it since we've come to government and it's costing over $10 billion dollars - but I think this says something amazing about Australia. I mean, that's actually what civilization and society and a good-hearted country looks like, it’s when you have a PBS. I've met so many of those who have been on clinical trials, on these drugs. I met a chap the other day and he actually used to work for the Productivity Commission many years ago. He was an economist and very excited about the Budget coming up. But he had a very rare form of skin cancer and this is one of the drugs we listed in the Budget. Now he was in a position to actually pay for this. Now that is a lot of money, hundreds of thousands of dollars. He was thrilled -  he knew he'd been able to put himself in a position to do that, but anyone else would not have. The look on his face when he shared the news was just wonderful. This is what a great country does.

But it can't do it, if you haven't got a strong economy. That's the point we've been making; you run out of money as Labor always does, then they stop listing medicines and that's what they did.

INTERVIEWER: But it's something that just as a bloke, it’s got to feel good. You look at your time in office, reaching the highest office in the land and you've been able to help those people?

PRIME MINISTER: I mean last year when we did the Budget - I think I remember talking about spinal muscular atrophy and how that's changing the lives of young Australians and their parents - the letters I've had, the stories I've heard, I mean Greg Hunt has the best job in the world I think as the Health Minister to be able to make these changes. But I got to say the other one that I felt very strongly about and I put at the top of the list for what we had to do in this year's Budget, that was our $461 million investment in tackling youth suicide and youth mental health. I don't think I've met anyone who hasn't known someone or heard of a story, whether through a friend or God forbid, their own family where they haven’t in some way been touched by youth suicide. Greg Hunt tells the account of after he became Health Minister and he went up to the north coast of NSW where they’d one of those horrible clusters of suicide events amongst young people. We put a Headspace in there and he told the Parliament today, that there hasn't been a report of one since. Now I hope that's true and have I know Greg hopes so as well.

We can make a difference in this area. So 30 new Headspaces that will be put in place as a result of this. But it goes down to things – you might know with your own kids - but Smiling Minds is that little (inaudible) and I mean, my daughter used to use it. There's some work that we're doing with that group and it's the smallest things to help build children's resilience and to deal with mental health issues as they grow older. Then there is just the heartbreaking events of what is occurring in remote Indigenous communities and we've talked about that off air as well before. I mean that's what was happening over the summer and that was just chilling.

INTERVIEWER: That’s it, clusters of as you say, clusters of teenagers, kids as young as 12 and even younger. The fact that you are so hopeless.

PRIME MINISTER: They decide not to live, that seems to them the right option for you. Now there's mental illness that's attached to that. There's desperation, there's hopelessness and as a nation as big, as generous and as strong as ours, that's something we have to tackle and beat. As Prime Minister I want to beat it.

INTERVIEWER: One of the knocks that seems to be coming from the obvious sections of the media, most likely informed by your political opponents, is the only way you get to surplus is because somehow you're skimping on the NDIS. I'm assuming this is something you believe not to be true.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's a lie and it's a stupid lie. Look, there's a reason why Labor clearly haven't been able to deliver a surplus since I had long curly hair and I understand Josh had a mullet.

INTERVIEWER: And I was thin.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: It’s because they don't even know how Budgets work. The NDIS is fully funded. Every invoice paid, every invoice presented, paid. The way it's funded is, as much as is needed, is provided. You make estimates from year to year, you work with the states and go; “We think it will cost that much this year.” When demand is expected to be less than that, then there's an estimates variation. It's not like there's some money that is being held back, that's not how the Budget works. It works with things like carers payments and Newstart and all the rest of these things. You make adjustments as you get a better handle on what the actual demand will be.

Now the NDIS is the biggest social project that the government has been embarking on, for many, many years, probably since Medicare. So it's big and it still has a lot of kinks to work through. I know there are still frustrations, but the per person funding that is available in that scheme didn't change. It was just an adjustment in how many people we expected to have to have to pay for it in that year. We now believe we'll hit the target of how many people will need it in the current year, one year later. That's all it means. So I thought it was this very disingenuous from Labor. If they knew that, then I think that's pretty crook to be using the NDIS in that sort of political way. If they didn't know it, well, they're just stupid.

INTERVIEWER: But do you care that something as clearly inaccurate as that, takes hold in the media as quickly as it does? It frankly flushes out the people that, it wouldn’t matter if you gave people $100,000, they still would have found a way to say; “Terrible Budget, they're on their way out”

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I mean if that's what the Labor Party have to rely on - and I thought their response today to the Budget was the most feeble I've seen in a long time. If that's all they could talk about, some concocted story like that which was misusing politically the National Disability Insurance Scheme which is supposed to be a bipartisan initiative - if that's how desperate they are, well I think that reflects very poorly on them and anyone else who was suckered by it.

INTERVIEWER: A lot of people watching us are involved in small business. This is going to be one of the big fights of the election, not just about the impact of minimum wage changes, but most importantly for one of the big boosts - and you could feel it a few years ago when the Government did it - which was the asset write off.

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

INTERVIEWER: The fact that even more companies will now be able to claim up to $30,000, This means you get to, people reinvest in their business and now they get to keep even more of their own money.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's how the economy grows; small and family businesses employ people, they invest, they develop new products, they open new stores. They buy a new coffee machine, they buy new fridge, they get a new toolmaking unit or whatever it is. Up to $30,000 now for businesses with a turnover up to $50 million, I mean business is up to $50 million employing more than half of the workforce in Australia today. That is who is driving the economy forward.

You know, I don't know what would be the point of working hard under a Labor government. I mean, how do you work the more tax you pay. The more regulation, the more they interfere with you. I mean under their new carbon trading scheme that they're talking about and their electric vehicles strategy -  well, there's nothing wrong with electric vehicles - but what they've got planned is, they want to tell you what to drive and they want to tell you what to put in the kid's lunch box. I mean Bill Shorten fingers are everywhere.

INTERVIEWER: Good luck with that. 

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, good luck with that.

INTERVIEWER: So this is the thing; the commentariat, the polls whatever, we all know the game that exists now. But isn't it interesting that when the NSW election was 50/50 in the polls, the media covered it in a completely different fashion that meant Michael Daly blew himself up in the last week, it mattered. For you, you’re hopeful - and you go into every day as 50/50 no doubt - but do you think that if people reset, went back to zero and went; “Okay it's 50/50 from here,” that the campaign is going to look a whole lot different than one where people think the outcome is already clear?

PRIME MINISTER: No I don't think – increasingly - that people do think that it’s clear. I think as we get closer to the election, the issues will be come into sharper focus. I mean the thing I love about Australia and politics is Australians aren't that interested in politics most of the time. They’re more interested in the things that matter to them each day, whether that's their family, their kids, their work or indeed the bills they’ve got to play or their team on the weekend. They're the things they're really passionate and focused about. I mean, there are others who are more interested in politics, but as we get closer - and we saw this in the state election too - people focus and they sharpen and they look at what the options are. They look at what the issues most important to them are.

So this will be an election like all the ones that have gone before it. Australians will weigh it up and they'll make a call and there's a fairly straightforward choice; higher taxes under Labor, lower taxes under us. You get Bill Shorten or you get me.

INTERVIEWER: To those people that, either in the past have strayed, or find it hard to go as hard as they may have in previous years, what do you say not to the paid-up and proud members of the Liberal Party, but the person who has voted more than not for the Liberal Party, about why they should fight just as hard in the next couple of months, as they did six years ago?

PRIME MINISTER: Because the country they're going to live in for the next 10 years is going to be determined by this election.

Last night we got back to surplus. A surplus Budget next year, for the first time in 12 years. The last time we saw one, was when another Victorian Liberal came to the dispatch box in Peter Costello. It's taken  12 years to get back to that point. Today we have more people employed of working age as a share of that population, than at any other time in our history. The previous record was set in 2007, just when Peter Costello and John Howard left office. We just got back over that mark in the last 12 months.

You vote Labor once you pay for it for a decade. I don't want to see another decade that starts with a Labor government coming and unravelling all the great work we've put in place. Not for us, but because of what it means for the economy that your kids are going to have to find a job in. That the business you're running is going to have to survive in and with all these headwinds.

I find it interesting when people put this question to me about the Budget; “Oh, there's all these headwinds, is now the time that you would have tax relief?” Well, this is the best time to have it. I have no idea how the economy can be more resilient, by taxing it more. I mean it's like, you know, someone is doing laps in swimming, and saying: “Here, put his weight belt on, I'm sure that's going to help you a lot going up and down the pool.” But that's what Labor wants to do.

And so I'd say to all of those Australians; this is really going to make a big difference. It did last time when they switched from John Howard and Peter Costello to Kevin Rudd. We all remember how that went, we all remember vividly. And this mob are worse.  

INTERVIEWER: Just finally, Married At First Sight sadly beat the Budget in ratings last night. Any plans on putting those couples into the Senate just at the last minute?

[Laughter]

You know, captain’s pick candidates, one of those crazies?

PRIME MINISTER: No, but I suspect there may be other parties that will give them a run.

[Laughter]

Who knows, that’s why elections will bring the great and the good and sometimes the ‘a little odd’ as well. But look we are coming up to an election and that’s something special in this country. I know as a country, we don't have the same sort of politics that they do in the United States or the UK or places like that. I always think that's a good thing here in Australia. You know, people turn up, they'll take the decision seriously. They understand the responsibility and what is at stake and I'll be talking to them about that decision and I'll be respecting them in how I engage with them on that. Because you know, a stronger economy, that is what enables everything else. That's what opens the door to everything else. We are a strong, prosperous country thank God and I want to make sure it stays that way, because I want my kids to grow up and one just the same.

INTERVIEWER: And one as we mentioned before about the PBS, that was actually able to help people last night.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s it.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister congratulations and thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks mate, cheers.  

INTERVIEWER: I can only guess that he’s here to call the election now, live on the air in what would be a 2GB exclusive – that’s just a guess I might be wrong - Scott Morrison good afternoon to you.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Ben – there’s a fair chance you might be wrong. Fair chance.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Oh, what?

PRIME MINISTER: No mate I’m here in Sydney and it’s nice to be back home after a big week down there Canberra with the Budget.

INTERVIEWER: You’re kidding, hang on a moment, you're letting me down here. I was convinced, hang on a moment, he’s going to buck all tradition here, he’s going ignore tradition and he's going to call the election live on my show.

PRIME MINISTER: As it's usually done by most prime ministers?

INTERVIEWER: Then you’ll go and see the Governor-General on Saturday or Sunday.

PRIME MINISTER: Well the election will be called in April and it will be held in May, that's as much of the detail I can tell you about today Ben.

INTERVIEWER: I’ve just missed out on one of the biggest scoops of my life.

PRIME MINISTER:  Well it wouldn’t be the first time.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Alright, well look we do have a few minutes to talk to you, so if you change your mind, I’m here. First things first, reaction to the Federal Budget, let's get to that. First of all you're promising Australia will be back in the black, back in surplus.

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

INTERVIEWER: How do you reckon the Budget has been received by Australians? You’ve already had a chance to get a bit of a sense of that?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah the feedback I've had, I was down in Nowra this morning just chatting to people down there and obviously I’ve been getting a lot of feedback through the phones and people's electorate offices all around the country. I think people do see it as a good balance between responsibility and reward for people's effort, but also the reality of what we're facing in terms of the economic challenges ahead. I think they see that as a good balance.

I mean it’s a Budget about saying to people; “If you have a go, you'll get a go,” and “we're not going to hold you back”. That's what tax cuts are all about, not just right now but into the future as well; you keep more of what you earn. The investments, particularly in our major cities on the infrastructure and the congestion-busting initiatives, that's been well-received, because we've been rolling out those programs for a while. But the broader road projects - like the one I was talking about this morning on the South Coast  - many of you listeners would know the notorious section of the Princes Highway down at the Sussex Inlet turnoff – it’s $ 500 million and working all the way down the coast.

These sorts of projects is why you want a strong economy. I mean, it's great we're having a surplus next year, we've worked hard to get to it. But a surplus of itself, isn't the point. It's what you use the surplus to do and that is to pay down the debt and invest in the essential services Australians rely on.

INTERVIEWER: I was watching Q&A at the start of the week.

PRIME MINISTER: Why?

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: I had a problem with the remote control, I got stuck. Anyway, I tuned in on Monday night and there was someone asked a question  - this this whole thing about power bill relief – “Why don't people on Newstart get it?” I mentioned the next day I really quite liked how Arthur Sinodinos said; “Look, I don't know.” You don't often hear that from politicians. But he said; “I don't know, I don't know the answer for that.” You guys obviously then went and had a look at it and went; “Righto, we’re going to extend it.” Just talk me through how that all unfolded?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I wanted Australians – and we did this a couple years ago for pensions, you see pension welfare payments are different to the others, pension payments are permanent welfare payments. If you’re on a Disability Support Pension, the Age Pension or a widow's pension, these are living welfare payments. The thing about Newstart and a lot of these other allowances is, they’re temporary payments. Two thirds of people are off Newstart within the year. Now there was a growing sense of the mood that in order to see this supported, that it would pass the Parliament quickly in a couple of days - you know we're in a minority government so I have to be sensible with that - I said; “Well, let's not have the politics and the ‘argy bargy’. If that's the genuine consensus that exists across the Parliament, then we’ll extend it to those other payments”. And we're in position to do it, because we outperformed the Budget that I announced just under a year ago, by over $10 billion dollars. So we're in a position to accommodate it.

INTERVIEWER: Fair enough.

PRIME MINISTER: Let's just get it done.

INTERVIEWER: And when you consider what Newstart is, it's not a lot of money so I don't –

PRIME MINISTER: No, it’s not Ben. So it was about the Budget, I was happy to do it and it was just being quite practical and sensible.

INTERVIEWER: Alright, Bill Shorten had his reply last night, among other things he's promising $2.3 billion to slash the cost of cancer treatment for Australians. Do you like that idea? I reckon it's been pretty well received today.

PRIME MINISTER:  We all stand with people with cancer, I mean we've got $9 billion of funding going towards 130 separate drugs under the affordable medicines program, the Pharmaceutical Benefit scheme. Where these drugs can cost $150,000, or $200,000 a course, we bring that down to $40.50 and $6.50 for concessions. So you know, we are doing this. I'll take a good look at what they've proposed and it's not clear yet how much of that is actually new money and how much of us overlap with things that are already happening now. So we'll take a look at that when they release the detail.

INTERVIEWER: In the interest of flexibility, like on the Newstart thing, if you do look at it, if you look at it and go; “Alright we're in a pretty strong position as far as finances are concerned, we might be able to do a few more things for people with cancer considering the number of people impacted by it,” you're willing to take a look at that?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm always interested in how we can help people with cancer. I think what was potentially a bit misleading last night was the suggestion that there aren’t free treatments now.

I mean if you go to a public hospital at the moment, all the things that he was talking about last night, that all happens for free at a public hospital now.

INTERVIEWER: That's what most of my callers have been saying to me today.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it’s true.

INTERVIEWER: Not all of them, but most of them today have saying; “Well you know, when I went through my own cancer battle, I didn't pay for any of this stuff”.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah and that is true. So, the suggestion that somehow our health system doesn't provide this for free, now, I think is misleading. Or you know, there's another word for it, but let's be good-natured about it.

In the Budget we have announced on Tuesday night, we had the biggest ever program to tackle youth suicide and mental health for young people in this country. I was quite hopeful that he would have supported that last night. I mean that's why - dealing with disabilities today, I announced the Royal Commission into the abuse of people who are disabled – these things should be above politics. Whether it's tackling youth suicide or dealing with cancer, I mean –

INTERVIEWER: And you’ll go above politics on cancer if you feel you can do more, you will?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure, of course.

INTERVIEWER: Now, of electric cars. Have you got one?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t, but I know it takes more than six to eight minutes to charge, I mean crikey. Seriously, I joked today at a lunch event, I was speaking there today; he must have been talking about those little cars you give to your kids. But I don’t think that’s what going to get everybody to work. 

INTERVIEWER: Oh, a Scalextric electric car set? He might have been talking about them.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t know what he was talking about.

INTERVIEWER: I should just play for people what we’re referring to. This is Bill Shorten talking to Kyle and Jackie O on KIIS FM.

INTERVIEWER: How long does it take to charge one up?

INTERVIEWER: Oh, it can take, it depends what the original charge is. But it can take eight to ten minutes, depending on your charging. It can take longer.

PRESENTER – RECORDING : Oh, is that all?

INTERVIEWER: Well it depends how flat your battery is.

INTERVIEWER: Now, what he’s saying is right … because if you charge an electric car for eight minutes, it will get you from Cronulla to Caringbah.

[Laughter] 

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t think it would get you from Northies to North Cronulla, I don’t think it’d get you that far.

But I think the problem with this is, Bill came up with this plan last Monday and it's clearly not thought through. I mean he reckons that 50 per cent of the cars that we all are driving around in 10 years from now will be electric cars. But the share of the market at the moment, is 0.2 per cent. He hasn't thought through what that means for diesel and fuel excise, that's around about $11 billion a year. Now, if you go and buy an electric car, well obviously you don't pay the fuel excise, what is that going to mean for that revenue stream and what's the cost of that? What about all these charging stations, how much is that going to cost? I mean if you have an electric car and you live in an apartment, are you going to run the extension cord down from your fourth floor window? I mean this thing is not thought through and it's just typical of what we see from Labor; a big goal - a 45 percent emissions reduction target, climate heroes - but the actual detail of it, is all fluff.

INTERVIEWER: There’s a mob called ‘Aussie Farms’ you may have seen these guys. They’re the people who put that map up of farm locations and they've been invading farm land, even though they've been told not to come on them. We revealed at the top of the show today through the Farmers Federation that they've secretly planned another one on Monday in Queensland and Victoria and also New South Wales. They've done their best through their messaging to say; “We’re going to keep all this quiet, we don't want anyone to know.”  We have read out on air this afternoon, with the Farmers Federation what their plans are for Monday. What would you say about activists storming private property and going on to people's farms and terrorizing people?

PRIME MINISTER: Throw the book at them - and there are some other measures that the Government has been looking at, I've been working with the Attorney-General on this and the Minister for Agriculture. I think this is disgraceful, I'm sick of it. You don't - I mean our farmers are going through probably one of the toughest times we've seen in a very, very long time. These grubs carrying on like this, I think it’s despicable.

The fact is, you know the Greens and all these people think this is all jolly and alright. It’s just not on. That's why we're looking at taking further steps on this sort of thing, we’ve been working closely with the AG, I won’t say much more about it now. But this is not Australian. This is what I really can't stand about all of this, these types of initiatives; why are Australians looking to go to war with Australians over this? Why can't they help each other out? I mean they think their cause is bigger than the livelihood of a fellow Australian. I just find that despicable.

INTERVIEWER: Speaking of people going to war with Australians, you had said earlier in the week that you're not going to put any Australian life at risk to extract people from conflict zones?

PRIME MINISTER: Correct.

INTERVIEWER: Talking about people who go and sign up with Islamic State, you've also made some comments in relation to the children of Khaled Sharrouf, one of our most infamous terrorists. You’ve spoken about these children, you’re saying in the case of the children who were the innocent victims of those who took them into this atrocious place, they have a responsibility here. But “where there are Australians who are caught up in this situation particularly as innocent children, we will do what I think Australians would expect us to do on their behalf.” So does that mean bringing them here to Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: It all depends where they are. I mean they're there in a conflict zone currently, so I'm not going to put any Australian diplomat or any other Australian in a position of risk to go and extract anyone from these situations. But we are open to work with the Red Cross if they have identified people and they’re able to come to a position where they might seek travel documents or something like that, for children. In some cases Ben we're talking about orphans.

INTERVIEWER: I'm really torn on this and I feel so sorry for these children. There are so many children out there PM, who find themselves in circumstances based on the decisions made by their mum or dad, rightly or wrongly.

PRIME MINISTER: True.

INTERVIEWER: But I really worry too when you got 16 and 17 year olds, I worry whether you’re importing a problem here. If they grow up feeling like their father's life was taken by, you know, Australian-backed forces, are they going to seek revenge or retribution? I mean someone said earlier on the open line, just lastly; “Look, you know, it’s terrible for these kids, but let's face it, is anyone going to want them sitting next to their kid in the classroom here in Australia?”

PRIME MINISTER: Look to be fair, particularly when you're talking about younger children, I mean, kids are kids I think. I think we all respect the innocence of children.

We have pretty strict processes about what we'd have to go through, basically firstly ensuring that their identity is as they say it is and the citizenship issues check out. For that to happen they would have to be in a location where this could be done and in that case if all the checks are completed and they request travel documents, well, that's when the Government actually would consider providing that documentation. But the point is -

INTERVIEWER: You think we need to show a bit of love. We need to show we’re humane?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ve got to get the balance, I mean these are kids. These are kids and what their parents have done is criminal, going in there and fighting against Australia and against likeminded countries. That’s unacceptable and the other thing I won’t do is separate children from their parents. So if the parents think this is a way of getting themselves over the line, well think again.

But when we’re talking about innocent, unaccompanied children, well that's something we'll have to deal with on a case by case basis and I think, in a sensible way.

INTERVIEWER: It is a risk though isn’t it?

PRIME MINISTER: We won’t compromise it, but one thing that happened in the Parliament this week Ben – you may be keen to know –  there are a lot of these foreign fighters and now they've lost that fight, some of them think; “Oh well, I was all confused and I wish I hadn’t,” and all the rest of it.

Well, my view on that is; “Tough.” On temporary exclusion orders which we sought to legislate in the Parliament this week – and the Labor Party wouldn’t support us - this is a rule that says if any one of these foreign fighters sought to come back into Australia, which if they’re an Australian citizen and their citizenship hasn’t been expunged -  then they can enter the country, but we would have been able to put them on what was effectively in a parole-like set of circumstances with reporting provisions. Now the Labor Party didn’t support us to pass that and that meant we couldn't get it through the Parliament. I thought that was another tell from Labor, that when it comes to national security, you just can't trust them, their heart is not in it.

INTERVIEWER: Bringing the children of terrorists here is a risk, isn't it?

PRIME MINISTER: Well look, I don't think you can generalize to be fair Ben, I think you just take each and every case, you apply your process, the discipline, the intelligence, the judgment and which there are very experienced people working on in this area. So you know, we've just increased for example, our funding in this Budget by $560 million dollars for resources for ASIO and for the Australian Federal Police to bolster their counter-terrorism work.

I mean we are now, sadly but necessarily, surveilling eight times more people than we did when we came to government. That's what we have to do and that's what we are doing. Under our Government going forward, that's what we will always do.

INTERVIEWER: Really appreciate you sparing some time to call in this afternoon, I know I've probably gone over the allotted time. What have you got on tomorrow?

PRIME MINISTER: That Sharks are playing the Eels mate, so I’m excited about that. I think its going to be the game of the round and down in my beloved Shire it's the opening of the shield season, so some of the district’s boys will be running out for the first time and there's a rumour that the Prime Minister is going to be doing the kickoff. So that could be fairly ugly.

INTERVIEWER: What have you got on Sunday?

PRIME MINISTER: I go to church on Sunday mate.

INTERVIEWER: So you’re in Sydney on Sunday?

PRIME MINISTER: I go to church in Sydney, yeah.

INTERVIEWER: Not planning to go to Canberra on Sunday?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, we’ll see.

INTERVIEWER: You are?

PRIME MINISTER: It’s a mystery Ben.

INTERVIEWER: Do you need the address of the Governor-General’s joint?

PRIME MINISTER: Well he’s going to be here in Sydney too, so you never know.

INTERVIEWER:  So you can just go to the Sydney residence?

PRIME MINISTER: Mate he might be out there at the stadium on Saturday night, mind you he’s a Roosters fan. But Lady Cosgrove is quite keen on the Sharks.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Alright, so we’ll be at the polls really soon, but you’re not saying when?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, of course not Ben. I mean the election will be called, there are three dates, 11th, 18th or 25th and we’ve just released our Budget. We’re out there – Josh is down in Melbourne today speaking at a number of events and I've been back home in Sydney today and it was also good to be down there with Warren Mundine on the South Coast. He’s doing a visa cracking job down there and getting a tremendous reception. Warren Mundine - I mean you know Warren - I think he's going to be, if he gets the opportunity which I believe he will, I think he'll be fantastic in the Australian Parliament. He's got so much to offer.

INTERVIEWER: Well I was hoping for the scoop, you haven’t given me one but it's always nice to chat, thank you so much for coming on.

PRIME MINISTER:  Good on you Ben, cheers.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day.

INTERVIEWER: Plenty of sweeteners in the Budget for working Australians. Is it a bit too soon though? We’re still in budget deficit, $4 billion this year, $7 billion next year. Have you bought that relief forward too much?

PRIME MINISTER: No, because what this is about is entering Australians that keep more of what they earn. The reason we’re back into surplus, is yes, we’ve kept spending under control, yes we’ve kept taxes under control, but it has been about the hard work of Australians. They’ve been going out there and working hard and small businesses working hard. That’s why they also have tax relief with that instant tax write off up to $30,000, businesses up to $50 million, family businesses. That’s what has been driving our economy forward and the best way to deal with the difficulties ahead, is to ensure that our economy is strong and that Australians, whether they’re working for themselves or they’re working for others, that they’re getting the incentive and reward for their effort.

That’s how to make a stronger Australia.

INTERVIEWER: Okay tax is one side of it, but the other side is wage increases. Look, you’ve have had record jobs growth, no denying that. Unemployment is so low, but we're still not getting the pay rises are we? Is that going to change?

PRIME MINISTER: Well as the Reserve Bank Governor only said only this week, what we have seen is an improvement in real wages, but there’s still a long way to go and you're not going to get better wage increases without a stronger economy.

You’re not going to get better wage increases from an economy that is weighed down by higher taxes.

That’s why we are keeping taxes low. That’s why we’re supporting small and family businesses, so the economy can grow. We’re investing in the congestion-busting infrastructure that gets tradies out of the traffic jams and onto the site, where you can actually earn. You’re not going to have better wage growth in a weaker economy, where there would be $200 million in higher taxes from the alternative being put forward by Labor.

INTERVIEWER: See, these budget surpluses, which look impressive in the years going forward, just terrific, they’re all dependant on maintaining a strong economy. But the Treasurer even in his speech said we're facing really difficult economic conditions in the next few years, particularly from overseas. Do you think you can deliver those surpluses?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we can. I mean the last two Budgets were better - when I was standing here last year, we bettered what we said we were going to do by $10 billion. It was the same the previous year. So we have form on doing better than what we’ve outlined in the Budget, that’s what we have been able to achieve and I think that’s why Australians do trust us. You’re right, we're facing some difficult times ahead and now is not the time to hand the economic wheel over to others who don't have to drive. It’s to keep us going in the direction we're going, because the next decade, the decade we will all live in and our children will live in, the opportunities we’ll have and the businesses we’re responsible for, these are things that are going to be conditioned by the economy people live in. That’s why we need it as strong as possible.

You don't make an economy stronger by taxing it more or having reckless emissions targets which only put the price of everything up.

INTERVIEWER: Big infrastructure spending. What, $100 billion over the next few years? I’ve got to say, you must be a fan of Utopia, the TV series because you’re creating a National Fast Train Authority. It takes us back to that series. Big infrastructure in regional areas, which need the jobs growth?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s right, this infrastructure plan is all about two things. It’s about managing population growth for the future. So the Fast Rail to go from Melbourne to Geelong - and the other projects which we’re now examining - but that Melbourne to Geelong one we’ve put the $2 billion down for that and we’re going to get on with that project. That’s about our satellite cities, that’s about congestion-busting in our cities, dealing with pinch-points and chokepoints that are actually tying up our economy. We’ll make sure that people can get home sooner and safer, to spend time with their families.

Out in the regional areas it’s about linking the farm to the port and to the markets.

INTERVIEWER: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: It’s about connecting our regional areas with our major centres. It’s also about making our roads safer. But the thing I love about investing in infrastructure is, it creates jobs. It creates jobs particularly in regional areas. I mean the money we’re putting into the Princes Highway down on the south coast of New South Wales, that’s not only going to make what is a notorious stretch of road - which I know very well – much, much safer, but it’s also going to support local jobs and the local economy as well. So Warren Mundine I know will be very pleased about that.

INTERVIEWER: So this is obviously a marketing document for the upcoming federal election, it’s dependent on you getting re-elected. You can almost say anything at the moment and then backtrack later if you are re- elected.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no. 

INTERVIEWER: Are you going to guarantee all these measures? We have heard fast train plans for the last 20 years and none of them have ever got up. Are you guaranteeing everything in this Budget if you get re-elected?

PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely. At the last Budget, I said we were going to do the Melbourne Airport Rail Link and we have signed the heads of agreement with the state government there in Victoria to achieve just that. We said we were going to start work on the Western Sydney Airport and we’ve not only done that, but it’s now called the Nancy Bird Walton Airport and we're getting on with that.

Our record David, is of delivering these things. What we promised at the last election and what we’re promising at this one will be that.

But I want to pick you up on one thing. What this is, is a plan to keep our economy strong over the next 10 years. It’s a plan to build our economy, to secure Australia's future. The economy being strong is what delivers what has already been a more than 60 per cent increases in hospitals spending, in school funding for state schools and public schools, already that’s what we have achieved. A 27 per cent increase in funding for Medicare. Medicare bulk billing is now at the highest level we have seen in this country, because of a strong economy and a Government that values Medicare.

I’ve got to say, the thing I'm most proud of in this Budget, David, is the $461 million we are putting in to combat youth suicide.

INTERVIEWER: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: This is something all of us I think –

INTERVIEWER: Totally agree.

PRIME MINISTER:  One in four Australians struggle with mental health issues and for our young people, we’ve got to take this on. That’s what a strong economy and a surplus Budget does; it means we can take on these challenges, while funding drugs for leukaemia. That is what a strong economy is about.

INTERVIEWER: Couldn’t agree more with you on that point. Prime Minister you’ve got a very busy day ahead selling the Budget, appreciate you doing it live and first here on Sunrise, have a good day.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot David.

INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister joins me now from Canberra, Prime Minister thank you very much for being with us.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Leigh.

INTERVIEWER: When the Coalition was elected in 2013 it was on the back of promises to end Labor's debt and deficit nightmare and to rein in what you said was Labor's out of control spending. When we look at your record of six years in office, you've had deficits every year you've been in power, net debt when you were elected was 13.1 per cent of GDP and today it has grown to 18.5 per cent and Labor's spending during its term was on average just under 25 per cent of GDP. Yours is just over 25 per cent of GDP. Therefore on your own yardstick, haven't you failed to deliver what you promised?

PRIME MINISTER: No Leigh, we’re bringing down the first Budget surplus for next year and it's taken 12 years to get there. We have reined in -

INTERVIEWER: Projected.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s what the Budget surplus is next year, that’s what the forecast Budget surplus is. That’s how Budgets are done, the year in advance. That is the first Budget surplus that has been announced in 12 years’ time, but allow me to answer the question. We've actually got expenditure under control, to the lowest rate of growth that we've seen of any government in more than 50 years. We've got taxes under control. We've got people off welfare and into work. That in turn has restored the Budget and we’re now in a position to take the Budget into surplus.

That's a significant achievement, but it's been done by the hard work of Australians, because our policy settings have been designed to support Australians to invest, to employ people and to work hard. When that happens, your economy strengthens and you’re able to bring the Budget back into a surplus position which is what we were able to announce last night.

INTERVIEWER: What about my point on debt?

PRIME MINISTER: So no, I wouldn't agree with your rather negative view of our performance.

INTERVIEWER: What about my point about the size of net debt?

PRIME MINISTER: When you're running deficits, obviously your debt continues to increase Leigh, that's why it's so important to get the Budget back into surplus. That's what we've been working hard to do for the last six years. We've got expenditure growth down to less than 2 per cent a year, that is significantly lower than where we inherited it. It was more than double that when we came to government. Gross debt was running at 33 per cent increases every year under the previous government. So you know, to turn this ship around has been an extraordinarily difficult task, but we've done that. Having achieved step one of getting us back to a Budget surplus, we now have to pay down that debt and we'll pay down that debt on net debt by around almost $50 billion over the next four years. We’ll eliminate it over the next 10 years, which is what the Howard Costello government were able to do.

Our side of politics gets rid of debt, that’s what we do.

INTERVIEWER: Has the Coalition given up on cutting the company tax rate for large business? You were telling us a couple of years ago that our international competitiveness was being destroyed by the comparatively high company tax rate.

PRIME MINISTER: We're not taking that policy to the next election, no.

INTERVIEWER: Why have you given up on that, given as I say, that you were making the point a couple of years ago that it desperately needed to be cut for all businesses?

PRIME MINISTER: Because I don't believe it's supported and I think one of the things we learnt through that process is that there's a lot of work to be done by large businesses in this country to regather the trust of the Australian people that would see them support such an initiative. So what we have done is focus on those businesses that actually employ more than half of all Australians in our labour force and that is businesses up to 50 million in turnover. Last night we announced further measures for them. Not only is their tax rate coming down to 25 per cent but the instants asset write-off will be available to all of those businesses and that instant asset write-off will go up to $30,000 for each and every item.

So we're backing in the small and family medium sized businesses that employ more than half of Australians who go to work every day. They're the ones who have been really driving employment growth in this country as well. We want to keep backing them in to grow our economy.

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you a question that I also asked Treasurer Frydenberg last night; isn't it a sign of policy failure of this government, that you're giving people a one-off payment to help with expenses, rather than at this point in the life of your government being able to say; "Look, we've put in place policies during the past six years that have consistently driven down your medical bills, consistently driven down your insurance premiums and consistently driven down your power bills?

PRIME MINISTER: What we've done over the last five and a half years is increased funding for hospitals by over 60 per cent. We've increased funding for schools, public schools, by over 60 per cent. We've increased funding for Medicare by 27 per cent and we have the highest rate of bulk billing the country has ever seen, in Medicare. So we've been making the investments in those essential services. But to go to your question on the one-off payment, the reason we're in a position to do that is because of our success over the last 12 months to bring the Budget in $10 billion better than I said it would be when I handed down that Budget just under a year ago. So it's the product of our Budget management, that we put ourselves in the position to be able to make this payment, which is passing the Parliament this evening. That will be in people's hands before the end of the year.

INTERVIEWER: Last night when those payments were announced, or it was actually on the weekend, they weren't going to apply to people on Newstart. At the National Press Club today the Treasurer said that last night you, he and Mathias Cormann had a discussion and decided it would be appropriate to extend it. What changed your mind last night?

PRIME MINISTER: Well let’s deal with the whole measure. A couple of years ago we introduced pretty much exactly the same measure and it applied to pension payments. Now pension payments are  permanent welfare support payments that go to a large number of people -

INTERVIEWER: I understand that, but just what changed your mind last night?

PRIME MINISTER: Leigh, Leigh just allow me to finish the answer to the question. So that's the measure that we announced on Sunday, that previously received the support of the Parliament. Now, we're in a minority Parliament, we’re in a minority government situation and we announced that measure in the Budget, we announced it on the previous Sunday. There was a gathering support for that payment to be extended more broadly to other welfare recipients and I believed it was the pragmatic thing and the right thing to do, not to have some sort of political stoush in the Parliament. This had to be above politics.

INTERVIEWER: Captain's call?

PRIME MINISTER: So I took the decision together with the Finance Minister and the Treasurer to extend that payment so it would simply pass the Parliament, as it did today without any fuss and without any trouble. I'm happy to do that.

I'm very pleased that as result of the decision that we've taken, people will have that little bit of extra help as they go into the end of this financial year. So Leigh, it was a practical call to ensure that people got the support that I was hoping that I could provide to them.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, just a final issue before you go. You used to appear very regularly on Ray Hadley's radio program, what is your reaction to the allegations that 730 has aired this evening regarding Mr Hadley's workplace conduct?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I haven't seen the report Leigh, so I’m just going to leave that to 2GB. I'm answerable for many things, but I'm not responsible for private broadcasters.

INTERVIEWER: As a guest or subject of commentary on Mr Hadley's program, did you yourself ever feel bullied by him?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I'm not easy to intimidate, Leigh.

INTERVIEWER: What do you say to the comments from Imre Salusinszky who is the former advisor to the New South Wales Premier Mike Baird, that conservative politicians have a tendency to cave on policy decisions due pressure of broadcasters like Ray Hadley?

PRIME MINISTER: I think it's rubbish.

INTERVIEWER: You've never caved or changed your mind on anything due to pressure from commercial radio broadcasters, commercial television presenters?

PRIME MINISTER: No, not even the ABC.

INTERVIEWER: PM, thank you very much for joining us. I look forward to talking to you on the election campaign.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks, Leigh great to be with you.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison joins me now. Good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Hi Deb.

INTERVIEWER: I thought Tina Arena was your singer of choice and yet we’ve got ACDC Back in Black - not quite back in the black though, we're still back the red at the moment this year, aren’t we? 

PRIME MINISTER: No we’ll be back in the black in 2019/20, that’s what the Budget is, it’s 2019/20. I'm pleased that in the current year we’ve actually beat what I said the Budget would be last year by $10 billion. So we’re $10 billion better off than last year, just like we were last year.

We have form on actually bettering what we put in the Budget. That's what we put in for next year's Budget, we’ll be back in surplus for the first time in 12 years. It's been a long way back, from when we had a surplus under Peter Costello and John Howard. We had those Labor years where the surpluses turned into deficits. We've been able to turn it around over these last six years. We are now back in surplus, which means we can invest in things like tackling youth suicide, which is a great passion of my Government.

INTERVIEWER: Surpluses have been promised though and not delivered in the past. Labor's Wayne Swan failed to deliver four of them, very famously. Can you guarantee that this surplus will eventuate?

PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely, as I just said, in the last two budgets we bettered what we said we would do, by $10 billion each year.

Wayne Swan put a Budget together, that you’re talking about, that assumed an iron ore price at $175 US a tonne. I mean, he probably still thinks it's that price and it's not anything near that. So our forecasts, particularly when it comes to commodities, are very, very conservative. Always have been. That's why we have outperformed each year, on our Budget. That’s why we are further ahead than where a couple of years ago, we said we would be.

But a surplus is the first step, then you’ve got to pay down the debt. It took John Howard and Peter Costello decade to do that and we’ve set out a plan to do exactly the same thing. Paying down the debt and now using the surplus to invest in critical services. We have already increased hospitals and Medicare funding, 60 per cent more for hospitals, 27 per cent for Medicare, more than 60 per cent for state and public schools. That’s what we’ve already done, now I'm looking forward to investing more, to keep the economy strong and the services where Australians can rely on them.

INTERVIEWER: In the Budget though, last night the Treasurer did point out that there were headwinds the economy is facing - the slowdown in the global economy, the housing market is in a slump and forecasts of further house price falls to come?

PRIME MINISTER: True.

INTERVIEWER: Those are beyond your control, a lot of those factors, commodity prices too. So how can you guarantee a surplus when you can't control those factors?

PRIME MINISTER: Well our commodity price forecasts for example are well below, right now, what the price is. So we've been very conservative about those things, as we have in the past, which is why we have outperformed.

But the other thing I would say is, in facing those headwinds, you have to actually release the economy to perform. That's why we're getting taxes down. That’s why for small and family businesses, we’ve given them further tax relief in this Budget. That’s why we’re giving Australians, whether they’re on low and middle incomes, they’re getting that immediate relief. Millions and millions of Australians are benefiting from that right now and also, having a tax system over the next decade which means that most Australians will never see bracket creep in their life. Now I think that is a major change that gives Australians incentive for effort.

We want Australians out there having a go. This is a Budget which is a fair go for those who have a go. If Australians keep having a go like they have been under our Government, then we’re only going to get stronger. That’s how we can deal with the pressures ahead.

You cannot have higher wages by having higher taxes, that equation just doesn’t add up.

INTERVIEWER: Budgets are always political documents but this is especially so with the election looming, do you think that this will be enough to win votes?

PRIME MINISTER: This is a plan, an economic plan, that's what Budgets are. I’ve done quite a number of these and that’s what the Budget is, it’s your economic plan for how you’re going to see an economy over the next decade that’s going to be the economy Australians want to live in.

INTERVIEWER: But will it win votes though? Because you need those.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's for Australian to decide, but what I believe they’re looking for is for unemployment to stay low, for investments in infrastructure and investment in services – as I said – already, 60 per cent increases in funding for hospitals and for schools. That will continue and even more so into the future. Why? Because we are driving a stronger economy, keeping taxes under control, keeping spending under control and investing the dividend of the hard work of Australians, back into the services they rely on.

A critical one of those is busting-congestion in our cities. Our population management plan, which I announced a few weeks ago, is about having sensible migration intake backed up by strong infrastructure investment, dealing with the little chokepoints all across the country, in our cities –

INTERVIEWER: A lot have been in marginal seats.

PRIME MINISTER: They’re right across the country, they’re in Labor seats, they’re in Liberal seats, they’re all across the country. Because a whole city functions better when you deal with these chokepoints in the city.

When I was Treasurer, I had the Productivity Commission look at this and they said cities have got to function better for Australia to be more productive. So I want an economy over the next ten years that has lower taxes and is more productive, not one that has higher taxes, which is what our opponents are suggesting. Because higher taxes slow growth, it means lower wages and higher unemployment.

INTERVIEWER: Is it wise though to be spending the extra money that we do have when there are those headwinds that are facing our economy? Should we be putting this surplus in the bank?

PRIME MINISTER: What we’re doing is allowing Australians to keep more of what they earn. I don’t consider tax relief to be spending a dollar. Tax relief is saying to a small business that is working hard; “You get to keep more of what you’ve earned.”

INTERVIEWER: Well it’s spending our dollars to give the dollars though.

PRIME MINISTER: No, it’s not. No, it's their money. Tax relief is people being able to keep their own money. I think that's a really important distinction.

The Labor Party thinks that tax relief is spending money. It's not. It's Australians keeping their own money. I want Australians to earn more in a stronger economy and I want them to keep more of what they earn in a stronger economy. So they have the incentive to keep doing what they’ve been doing - making Australia stronger, making our economy stronger and I want to keep that incentive there for them. So, if you’re going out to work today, good on you, you're building a stronger country.

INTERVIEWER: The tax cuts you’ve announced equate to about $19 a week extra for the average Australian income. Do you think that will be enough to sway voters, do you think that amount of money in the pocket will be enough to make people think that’s a good policy?

PRIME MINISTER: This is the biggest tax relief we have seen since the Howard Government. For a middle income family, that's more than $2,000 a year. I mean, that's a power bill for the entire year on average in Sydney for example, for many families. So this does provide that relief.

But it does more than that Deb; what it does is say; “If you do better, you'll keep more of it.” That's the incentive. You cannot run a stronger economy where people have no incentive to actually go out there and work hard, take risks, run businesses and put the investment in. That’s what creates a stronger economy. We’ve got more than half a billion dollars in this Budget which is focused on skilling u’ Australians, not just those who are coming out of school, but for people leaving a job when they’re 55. People need skills across their whole lives and they need to be able to adapt and change and there’s more than half a billion dollars we’ve put into that very task here in Australia.

INTERVIEWER: To get that tax cut though, they will have to vote for you in the election because it won’t be introduced into Parliament this week, will it?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it won't make a difference whether it’s introduced this week or not. What Labor did last year –

INTERVIEWER: Well the election is looming, so?

PRIME MINISTER: But the Tax Office – if the Labor Party says they support our tax cuts, then the Tax Office can administer it on that basis. Last year, when I put a full tax plan into the Budget, Labor tried to play games with it, break it up and try to strip it away. Because you see, Labor's plan is to tax some people more, to pretend they’re helping other people. That's not how we do things. We think all Australians who work hard deserve tax relief. The Labor Party wants to punish some and engage in this class envy, which has no place in Australia. I think all Australians want to see all Australians do better. They don't think some people have to do worse, for them to do better.

INTERVIEWER: Will you be visiting the Governor-General this weekend to call the election?

PRIME MINISTER: There’s three dates for the election, the 11th, 18th or 25th, they're the options we have.

INTERVIEWER: Have you decided? 

PRIME MINISTER: When I decide to go out to the Governor-General, the people will see that car drive to Yarralumla.

INTERVIEWER: Have you made a decision yet on the date though?

PRIME MINISTER: No not yet.

INTERVIEWER: Not yet?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: And what are the factors you’re considering?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, they’re matters for a Prime Minister to determine.

INTERVIEWER: Mother's Day is on May 12th.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes it is.

INTERVIEWER: So will you and the girls be delivering Jenny breakfast in bed, or will you perhaps be too busy on the campaign trial?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we’ll all be together, I can assure you of that.

INTERVIEWER: I’m trying! I'm trying to get the date out of you.

[Laughter]

Of course ultimately voters will be judging you on performance, that’s the ultimate guide.

PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely, as they should.

INTERVIEWER: If you've been a good government though, how do you respond when people say why have you needed three Prime Ministers?

PRIME MINISTER: The real choice is who is going to be the Prime Minister after the next election. My Party changed its rules, so if at this election the Liberal Party and National Party are returned, then I will be returned as the Prime Minister and I will serve as Prime Minister over the next parliamentary term. That's what  our rule changes in the Liberal Party say. So the real choice is at the next election, do you want Bill Shorten and the Labor Party or do you want myself and the Liberal and National Parties? And our record is one that has brought the Budget back into balance for the first time in 12 years.

The last time Australians voted Labor and switched to the Labor Party, they’ve paid for it for the last decade and more. You vote Labor once, you pay for it for a decade. Now is not the time to hand over the economic wheel to a party that doesn't know how to drive.

INTERVIEWER: Alright, and Sunday? Should I put a mark around Sunday and expect to be on air announcing an election?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m sure you’ll always be on air, I’m sure your viewers will be demanding that you be on air all the time.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, we thank you for your time this week.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Deb.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister thank you very much for joining us.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Fran.

INTERVIEWER: It's taken twelve long years to get the Budget back into surplus. That's due next year. Now that you say you've done it, you want to hand out another $158 billion in tax cuts. How is that strong and prudent budget management, given the signs of an economic slowdown ahead?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to hand out anything. I just want people to keep more of what they earn Fran, that's what tax relief is. This is people's own money. This isn't spending, this is money that they've earned. We believe that the path to keeping our economy strong, which has been so responsible for the budget surplus that was delivered last night, the way you keep doing that is, you keep giving Australians the incentive to keep going out there and doing what they do every day, making our economy stronger by working hard, running their businesses and doing what they do best. You've got to give them the opportunity to keep doing that. I mean, otherwise why would they work harder under a Labor Government that just wants to increase their taxes? Under our Government they’ll have the incentive to keep doing exactly what they're doing. That's what makes our economy strong.

INTERVIEWER: But is $158 billion of promised tax cuts on top of $144 billion already legislated, this Budget tells us there are danger signs ahead for the economy. The global outlook is slow, the growth forecasts have been cut, employment growth has been downgraded, consumption growth is slowing too. How can such a lacklustre economy pay for or start paying for more than $300 billion dollars of tax relief?

PRIME MINISTER: Well again Fran you’re seeing it as expenditure. We don't see it as that, we see it as an investment in Australians to keep our economy growing. You don't make -

INTERVIEWER: Yeah but you’re also saying you're going to stay in surplus.

PRIME MINISTER: And we are going to stay in surplus over that entire period. We will pay the debt down to zero, just like John Howard and Peter Costello did, which is what the Budget set out last night. But you don't make your economy stronger and more resilient to face the very challenges you're talking about, by increasing taxes. I mean, $200 billion -

INTERVIEWER: No, but you don't get to surpluses and maintain them with slowing growth and slowing global outlook and tax handouts, do you?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s already taken to account in the Budget. That's why the Treasurer was able to say last night that we achieved these surpluses while maintaining the discipline of keeping our taxes below the speed limit of 23.9 per cent.

See, the way we've been able to get the Budget back into surplus, is by having the right responsibility, of balance, by keeping taxes under control, keeping spending under control. That's why we've seen people go from receiving welfare payments, to receiving wages, going from welfare into work in record numbers. That's how the Budget balances and stays in a surplus. You keep your economy strong by backing the Australians who make it strong.

INTERVIEWER: Okay well speaking wages, Bill Shorten has declared the election will be a referendum on wages. Wages are forecast in your Budget to grow 2.75 per cent next year, 3.25 in 2020/21, but the same Budget papers show employment growth slowing next financial year and beyond and unemployment stuck at 5 per cent. If there's no tightening of the labour market going on and growth forecasts are downgraded what is going to push up wages?

PRIME MINISTER: Well our forecasts are always conservative. As you know unemployment is now at 4.9 per cent, which is better than -

INTERVIEWER: Well, they’re not always conservative, we haven't hit the wages forecasts for the last five budgets.

PRIME MINISTER: And what we have achieved are $10 billion and better improvements on the Budget bottom line in the last two Budgets we delivered, Fran. So we've been overachieving on what we've put in the Budgets for years now. That's why we've been able to come back and get the Budget in surplus. But you know what, the important -

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, but where is the wages growth going to come from?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll tell you. The wages growth is going to come from businesses continuing to expand, more people accessing more markets investing in their businesses, because of the low tax environment we're creating for them.

INTERVIEWER: But you’ve got unemployment growth slowing in this Budget.

PRIME MINISTER: Employment growth continues because we've got unemployment down to the lowest level in the last decade, Fran. So we're going to get more people in jobs, 80,000 more apprentices we're going to train. This is what the Budget is driving; continued growth in our economy. That's where you get wage increases from. You won't get wage increases from a reckless emissions target of 45 per cent, which is going to force those same businesses that people want wage rises from, to spend $36 billion paying for carbon credits from companies from countries overseas.

INTERVIEWER: Let's come back to your Budget, let's come back to your tax package. The most immediate measure - a lot of moving parts in this tax package - the most immediate measure is the proposed doubling of the low and middle income tax offset, which is worth up $1,080 for every single Australian and double that for dual income families.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: Four and a half million taxpayers would receive that tax cut from the 1st of July. But you're essentially matching, a little bit more, the promise Labor has have on the table for a year. That makes it a net neutral at the ballot box in May, doesn’t it?

PRIME MINISTER: No. This is the big lie of what Labor's been saying about their tax plan. Labor's tax plan is about taxing some people more, to pretend they're providing relief to others. We're providing tax relief right across the board, Fran.

INTERVIEWER: In the short term, in the first four years, you’re providing tax relief for the same group Labor is.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no there’s tax relief going right across the board. Now, that tax relief is designed to encourage Australians to go out there and keep doing what they're doing. You know, you’ve got people at the moment, they're on their way to the trams and they're on their way to the trains and the ferries and I want to give them the incentive every single day - regardless of where they sit in the labour force, regardless of what job they have or what their income is - I want them to keep going out there and doing the right thing for their families, which they want to do.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah and in a real comparison over the forward estimates, over the next three to four years, middle income and low income Australians would get the same immediate tax hit from you as they would from Labor.

PRIME MINISTER: No, because we're not going to put on 45 per cent reckless emissions target, which is going to put a further tax on the economy.

INTERVIEWER: Well that’s not about your tax cuts.

PRIME MINISTER: We're not going to put a $5 billion retiree tax on Australians. We're not going to increase taxes for half the population, this is what Labor plans to do, Fran.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, okay.

PRIME MINISTER: They have $200 billion dollars and more, plus the reckless emissions target, which will put up the costs of absolutely everything and cost wages by independent analysis of $9,000. That’s what Labor's plan is. Our plan is lower taxes and people keeping more of what they earn. But importantly, investing back in the services. I mean, hospital funding Fran, has increased by 63 per cent under our Government just till now. Medicare is up 27 per cent and schools funding is up -

INTERVIEWER: I want to talk about your Budget.

PRIME MINISTER: That is my Budget.

INTERVIEWER: I want to talk about your tax plan.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m talking about schools, hospitals and Medicare, Fran, and it’s all gone up.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, but most of the money in your Budget is going on this tax plan. You'd be happy to hear last night, I think, that Labor would support this initial part of your tax plan, the $1080 for individuals. They've said so already. There's only two sitting days left before the election, why not legislate that tax relief today to give taxpayers certainty ahead of the 1st of July if it's so urgent to people and their cost of living, why not take the trouble to get it through both Houses today?

PRIME MINISTER: Because Fran I'm going to put this Budget to the Australian people. Labor played this game last year and they tried to split our tax plan in the Parliament and played games to try and put up taxes for other people, while pretending to help others.

I’m going to let the Australian people decide on this. This will go to an election and it means that the Tax Office... if the Labor Party, if people think they can trust the Labor Party to reduce their taxes, well, their form goes completely against that.

People know they can trust us to deliver tax reform, because that's exactly what we have been doing now for five and a half years. The Tax Office - if the Labor Party says that they support the lower end tax cuts, well the Tax Office is able to go and administer the Tax Act on that basis. So the legislative issue is a moot one, what really matters, Fran, is would you trust Labor to actually cut your taxes? When their real plan is to increase taxes by $200 billion on the Australian economy.

That's why Treasurer said so many times last night; “We're increasing funding for hospitals, schools, Medicare and we're doing it without increasing taxes.”

INTERVIEWER: He did said a lot of times, eight times in fact in that speech. Prime Minister you’re essentially though, to put it bluntly, weaponising this $1,080 dollar tax cut to help you win the election, aren’t you? Haven’t low and middle income earners become hostage to the election campaign?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't believe so at all Fran, I think I just outlined it perfectly well. If the Labor Party supports the tax cuts, well, they have to do is say so and the Tax Office can administer it on that basis.

But I don't think Australians will trust them to do that, Fran and I don't trust them to do that because their form is to put up tax. You see, we have a tax discipline in our Budget which says that we have a speed limit on how much you can tax the economy. The Labor Party is going to abolish that and that's going to mean tens of billions of dollars of higher taxes weighing down our economy, slowing growth which slows wages. It puts people out of work.

Now, I want the next decade to be a strong one. You said at the start of the interview, it's taken us 12 years to get back to where John Howard left us and Peter Costello. Last time people changed the government and voted Labor, they've been paying for it for a decade.

You vote Labor once you'll pay for it for a decade. That's what last night's Budget demonstrated.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister I know your time is tight this morning and you must go, so one final question. Last time people voted for the Coalition too they voted for a different prime minister. They've ended up with you. You want people to judge you on your economic record. Your mantra is; “Who do you trust?” But why would the Government's economic record, a Budget back in black, why would that be at the forefront of their minds when they enter the ballot box? Why won't they be thinking of all the division and the disunity at the heart of the Coalition Government which has thrown up three prime ministers in four years?

PRIME MINISTER: Because that is our economic record, Fran. It's our economic record and the strength of the economy that matters to Australians going about their business today. The choice about who the leader will be, will be between Bill Shorten and I, for the country at the next election.

INTERVIEWER: Well, that's what they thought last time and then didn't turn out that way at the end of the term.

PRIME MINISTER: And the Liberal Party has changed their rules to ensure that successful at this election, then if you vote Liberal at this election, you get me as Prime Minister. If you vote Labor at this election, then you get Bill Shorten as prime minister. That's the choice that is before the Australian people. Our Party changed its’ rules, the Labor Party changed its rules many years ago. What that means is, at this election, if you vote Liberal, then I will be your Prime Minister for the next three years. What that means is the record investments in hospitals and schools. I've got to say, of all the measures in the Budget that we announced last night, Fran - and I'm sure you'd agree -  it’s the $461 million we're putting to combat youth suicide and youth mental health challenges. I don't know of a family in this country that in some way, through a friend or God forbid directly in their own family's experience, that haven’t been touched by youth suicide.

That's what a surplus does. That's what a strong economy does. That's the thing I'm most proud of in this Budget; that we are going to take on the challenge and combat youth suicide in this country. Because it's taking far too many of our young lives.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister thank you very much for joining us.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot Fran.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Alan.

INTERVIEWER: I don't want to take any air out of your tires but can I tell you that the switchboard and emails have been on fire here, not about the Budget, but about Mr Shorten's energy policy.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: I've said, this is a bigger economic statement that anything you said last night, because people are genuinely frightened. I’ll just read a couple; David said to me, “Please pass on our thanks to Bill Shorten. Up until now we thought there wasn't a choice in the election and the Libs would be heading to the door. Then Bill highlighted that the choice wasn't so simple when he started elaborating on his policy.” They go on and on with this sort of stuff, electricity bills. Now, just before I get you to comment here, I was just taking some figures out. I mean this is supposed to be the Labor Party, the party of the battler, the party of struggle street. Their car policy says otherwise. Mitsubishi's electric car would cost $49,000, Holden $60,000, Nissan $60,000, Tesla's $50,000. Many of them take more than eight hours for a standing charge. Then the argument is; “Oh well,” Bill Shorten says, “we can sustain an electric car and manufacturing industry”. Tony Shepherd, whom you know is one of Australia’s leading businessmen, says this is rubbish. He said we don't make any cars in Australia anymore, our manufacturing costs are very high, our cost of energy is nearly the highest in the Western world. The manufacture of any automobile, regardless of its engine, requires significant energy. It won't happen.

Now what are you saying to people? This is an economic suicide note.

PRIME MINISTER: Well it is Alan. I couldn't agree with you more on this, I mean frankly, they want to tell you what car to drive? This will put up the price of everything, it comes down to that. It's going to cost wages at least $9,000 a year. So you know, whatever you’re driving, Bill Shorten doesn't think you should be. It’s about 0.2 per cent of the car market today and he thinks he's going to take it to 50 per cent in ten years. But can I tell you another part of that plan which I find particularly troubling? This plan that he has to force companies to buy carbon credits from overseas.

INTERVIEWER: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: $36 billion will leave the country to go over and get carbon credits from Kazakhstan or wherever else they think they're going to get them from. That is money that is taken out of these companies that they would use to invest in their business, to employ people or increase their wages. I mean, it’s a reckless policy that threatens jobs, drives down people's earnings and at the most insidious level, it starts telling Australians how they need to live.

I mean, in our Budget last night Alan, we removed the luxury car tax on the Land Cruisers that farmers and people use in rural and regional areas and tourism operators. Bill Shorten says; “No, you can't buy those cars”. We’re going to actually make them more affordable for people who are doing it really tough as you know out in rural and regional Australia. We're getting rid of that tax and giving them the options and choices, through lower taxes more broadly, to get on and make the country as strong as it can be. Bill Shorten is going to tax the economy into non-existence.

INTERVIEWER: Well coming back to the energy - because as I’ve said I actually sent a message to Josh Frydenberg, I said look, congratulations and so on, but I'm sorry, you haven't released the most important economic document this week. This was Labor's energy policy.

PRIME MINISTER: He did.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, no doubt about that. This is dangerous stuff now.

You just take a liquid natural gas exporter and they say we're now going to have to pay for a carbon tax in Australia, but our rivals, Qatar and Malaysia or Nigeria, suffer no similar costs. What is going to be the loss to our economy of that export industry?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's going to be about a half a trillion dollars overall, we believe, as a result of what Bill Shorten wants.

INTERVIEWER:  You’re getting this costed, aren’t you?

PRIME MINISTER: We have and that BAE economic study that you’re familiar with, which I know you you’ve spoken to, their estimated cost of what Bill Shorten is talking about with his reckless carbon tax, carbon target - call it whatever you like, all I know is it’s going to increase the price of everything - that is going to cost the economy around half a trillion dollars. Now that's you know that's just under $500 billion or ‘five thousand million dollars’ as you would say. That's what it is. This is a huge dead weight on the Australian economy and he goes around talking about how he wants to increase wages and all this. You can't run a stronger economy, with higher wages, if you put this mountain of burden on the Australian people.

INTERVIEWER: You’re dead right. Dead right.

PRIME MINISTER: There is a reason we're going into a surplus Budget next year is because of the hard work of Australians. Sure, our Government has done the right thing getting expenditure under control, taxes under control, investing in things that drive the economy. But the thing that really is behind the numbers that we saw last night, is the hard work of Australians running businesses, running farms in drought.

INTERVIEWER: I’m sorry to turn you around here, thank you for that point. The businesses, okay. So we're talking about what used to be the Labor Party constituency - although John Howard brought them into the Liberal tent - but the tradesman.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER: Now, how the hell does he manage? There’s no electric ute on the market.

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: So what does this poor coot do when he uses a utility? Either he reduces his earnings and cops it, or alternately he puts someone off, or he jacks up the price of his product. I mean, this is a nightmare for these people.

PRIME MINISTER: That is all true. And by contrast what do we say? We're saying that the instant asset write off goes from $25,000 to $30,000.

INTERVIEWER: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: That it goes to businesses up to $50 million, that we’re going to spend over half a billion dollars training among that new apprentices, 80,000 new apprentices. So that tradie not only has a cheaper car, is paying a lesser cost for what he has to put in the tank, but on top of that he's able to get apprentices with additional incentives that helps him or her pass on their skills to another generation and we can keep building Australia and keep building our economy.

INTERVIEWER: I just want to come back to this point, because I know you live in the undiluted luxury of Cronulla, or else Kirribilli. But there are people who actually live in areas of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and whatever, where they have no off-street parking facilities, they park on the street.

PRIME MINISTER: True, yep. 

INTERVIEWER: Now again, Bill Shorten is saying that all these roads, new roads, new houses, new office developments, will have to have charging facilities. Now if this is the case –

PRIME MINISTER: The cost.

INTERVIEWER: That’s right! The cost of your car goes up, your house goes up, your office goes up and the cost of the road goes up. Where is this being costed? I mean, are you going to prosecute this?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there's no doubt we're going to prosecute it. One of the ones that we haven't talked about yet, is what they’re going to say to farmers.

INTERVIEWER: That’s it.

PRIME MINISTER: They're going to tell farmers, pastoralists and graziers what they can do on their land. Now, you know about this up in Queensland, those dreadful native veg laws that the Labor Government put in place up there.

INTERVIEWER: Yes, I do.

PRIME MINISTER: You know, it's bad enough that you've got to deal with droughts and floods.

INTERVIEWER: That’s it, good on you.

PRIME MINISTER: You’ve also got to deal with this numpty legislation, which basically tells farmers what they can do on their own land. Now, Bill Shorten wants to take that really bad idea and take it to the entire country. That is an insult to those who work on our land, particularly when they're going through some of the hardest conditions that any of them can remember.

By contrast what are we doing? We’ve got $6.3 billion dollars going in to support farmers in rural and regional communities that are drought-affected. Over $3 billion we're putting in for those hit by national disasters. You know what we're doing up in North Queensland, Alan, I know you keep in touch with what we're doing up there. Shane Stone is up there implementing that plan, we're rebuilding North Queensland fence by fence and beast by beast.

INTERVIEWER: Right, just a couple of things here because there is thousands of pages this stuff. Just amplify for our listeners, 94 - of course you've got to get through an election to enable any of this to happen - but 94 per cent of Australians - you’ve got to say this slowly - will pay no more than 30 cents in the dollar of course, if they re-elect you people. Just amplify that point simply.

PRIME MINISTER: This is so important and we're changing when you set the threshold as well. So that means that the highest marginal tax rate that 94 per cent of Australians will pay, is just 30 cents in the dollar. Now, it’s  currently 32.5 on the plan that we got legislated after last year's Budget.

For the Labor Party, that would be 37 cents. So this is giving people the incentive to work hard. Alan, I don't know what the point of working hard would be under a Labor government, because the harder you work, the more they tax you.

INTERVIEWER: Well, $200 billion of tax, I mean -

PRIME MINISTER: Exactly, $200 billion including the $5 billion on retirees. The most insulting thing I've heard - and they said it again yesterday in the Chamber when they were jeering at me - I said that these are Australians who are going to have to pay this retiree's tax under Labor who paid tax all of their lives. And they yelled out “They’re not paying tax”. That's what they think of those retirees! They’ve paid tax their whole lives.

INTERVIEWER: Don’t forget death duties, don’t forget death duties. Does anyone sort of save and invest in whatever, to have the government take it? Julian Burnside, the glamour candidate down there in Kooyong, says death duties, the CFMEU say death duties, the Labor unions say death duties. For God's sake.

PRIME MINISTER: It’s savage. What Julian Burnside and the Greens say, it’s absolutely savage.

INTERVIEWER: Now look, just a couple of things. I trust you're on top of all of this, I'm not suggesting you're not, but a couple of things that were important to our listeners here last night which won't be talked about today. I do want to thank you and Greg Hunt, who does a colossal job in the field of health. These two cancer drugs which are going to save patients up to $150,000 a year. Now are you across the detail, you’re going to you're going to add this Bavencio go to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. It’s used to treat a rare but highly aggressive cancer, so good on you.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I met with two sufferers, and they were in remission, on Monday. They have had access to that drug. One of them had it on a clinical trial and the other one was able to afford it.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you, so $40 a script now?

PRIME MINISTER: $6.50 for a concession card holder. There was also a lifesaving leukaemia drug we put on the PBS last night. More than 2,000 drugs we’ve put on the PBS, for lung cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer.

INTERVIEWER: On breast cancer I just want to raise for our listeners. That’s Ibrance which they've been writing to me about, it’s used to treat inoperable breast cancer. Patients currently pay $55,000, now under the PBS it is $40 for a script and $6 for a concession.

PRIME MINISTER: That's right. As all cancer sufferers tell you when you talk to them, they also want to see more money going to research and treatment facilities. We have got $100 million going into the cancer treatment centre in Sydney and there's $80 million going down into that marvellous Peter Mac Centre down there in Melbourne. We are investing record levels in cancer research, backing in people like Glenn McGrath and the work that he does with breast cancer nurses, we announced that funding at the start of this year.

But the lesser known cancers - I'm so pleased you mentioned that – on skin cancer, that's only going to support of a few hundred people, but they're Australians and every single Australian life, every single Australian life matters.

INTERVIEWER: That’s Bavencio. Well now I'll let you go because you've now got to talk about the most important economic statement of the week; the Shorten energy statement and I hope you'll prosecute that on behalf of everybody out there. I can tell you Prime Minister, in the emails and in the messages that are coming, that is all they are talking about.

PRIME MINISTER: I will Alan. Can I just mentioned one last this thing that I'm most pleased about in this Budget; that's the $461 million we're putting into combat youth suicide and mental health challenges in this country. There's not, I think, a family, a community in this country, that hasn't been touched by this, particularly in rural and regional areas, in remote Indigenous communities, in the suburbs of Sydney. This is this is something that breaks the nation's heart and last night, because of a strong economy, because we've got the Budget back into surplus next year, that means we can have the biggest fight against youth suicide this country's ever seen. I know all Australians are going to back us in on that.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you, well done and thank you for your time Prime Minister.

INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister Scott Morrison, Mr Morrison Good afternoon.

PRIME MINISTER: Hey Tom.

INTERVIEWER: I watched Josh Frydenberg’s first Budget last night, is it going to win you the next election?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s about it being a plan to actually grow the Australian economy and bring us into surplus and invest in the essential services Australians rely on. The answer to your question is in the hands of the Australian people and the plan we once again put to them last night, I think demonstrates that you run a strong economy, you bring the Budget back into surplus and it means he can guarantee the funding like hospitals and schools that they rely on. I mean, we've already increased funding for both of those by more than 60 per cent over the last five and a half years and we want to keep that going.

INTERVIEWER: But do you think the surplus matters in itself to everyday Australians? Because that was the most conspicuous thing in Josh Frydenberg speech last night, the surplus, the surplus, we’re back in black, we've got a surplus. Do you think your average person really cares?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that wasn't just what Josh said last night, that's certainly where he started because getting the Budget back into balance means Australia is paying its way. It means now we can pay down the debt and it means that there’s around $18 billion dollars in interest payments that goes on the debt and you've got to get rid of that, so you can invest more in things like hospitals and schools.

Now last night we announced the $461 million dollar plan to combat youth suicide and youth mental health issues. You can do that when you've actually got the Budget back into balance. You can provide tax relief like we did last night, when you get the Budget back into balance. That's why - I mean a surplus of itself, it’s a means to an end. It's a means to the end of reducing debt and putting funding into the things that really matter to people.

INTERVIEWER: Okay so will the ends, you know, the various spending programmes you outlined or Josh Frydenberg outlined, will they win you the election?

PRIME MINISTER: Well again Tom, that's for the Australian people to determine, I'm not complacent about this. What my job as Prime Minister is and the job of our team is to put forward our plans for how we're going to keep the economy growing and keep the Budget in balance. How we’re going to keep investing in the things that actually make a difference to people's lives and in Victoria, one of the biggest issues as you know - your callers call about it all the time and when I'm there this is the issue that is constantly raised - that's managing population growth.

So whether it's widening Racecourse Road out there in Flemington or Napoleon Road in Ferntree Gully with $50 million, all of these projects make the big difference so people get home sooner and safer. The money we've put into extending again, the funding for preschool education for 4 year olds, that makes a huge difference.

INTERVIEWER: I was recently wandering around the seat of Kooyong. I don't live there but my daughter goes to school there and I noticed most of the candidates who are running against Josh Frydenberg seemed to be running on environmental platforms, Julian Burnside, Oliver Yates. Should you have done more on climate change to make sure you don't lose seats like Kooyong?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ve got $3.5 billion dollars worth of initiatives we announced in the Budget last night, because we're meeting our targets for 2030, 26 per cent, we're meeting them. I've set out very clearly how every single tonne of that is going to be achieved. Our position is based on you can have your economy and you can have your cleaner environment, you don't have to sell one out for the other. Now Julian Burnside can make all the points he wants, but I mean I don't think I've seen quite a bigger level of hypocrisy being exploited onto the Australian people I'd say. I’d say his hypocrisy is absolutely savage. 

INTERVIEWER: Is it true that you will go to the Governor-General tomorrow and ask that Parliament be dissolved and an election be called?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: No, as in it's definitely not true?

PRIME MINISTER: No, the election will be called in April and it'll be held in May. I made it really clear last year when I said the Budget would be on the 2nd of April that the lead in and all the normal things would be allowed to take place and the Leader of the Opposition gets their reply.

INTERVIEWER: But it is April now.

PRIME MINISTER: I know, but I also said that the Leader of the Opposition would be able give their reply. When the election is called, well that will be done in April and it'll be held in May.

INTERVIEWER: Which date in May? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not saying at this point, because when I've made that final decision, when I go out to see the Governor-General, that's when that will be public.

INTERVIEWER: All right, we'll look forward to that. Now, the energy Newstart policy, I happened to watch Q&A accidentally on Monday night and I saw that Arthur Sinodinos was tackled on why the $75 to $125 energy subsidy wasn't going to people in receipt of Newstart. It looks as though you've backflipped on that. Is that true?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I wanted to see the payment passed through the Parliament and the Labor Party and others, you know, we were aware of the position and I wanted to see passed. I think we were in a position to be able to accommodate that and so it became part of the Government's bill. The reason we could do it is because our position in this current financial year was much stronger as a result of the way we've been managing things.

I mean, the difference between the Budget I handed down in May of last year for the current year we're in and where it's going to end up now, is better than $10 billion dollars. So we're in a position to share that improvement back with people who need it and we took the decision to extend that further in 2018/19, I don't have a problem that.

INTERVIEWER: No, no, but it was only a week ago that the energy subsidy was announced and it looks like…

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it was on Sunday.

INTERVIEWER: Well exactly, so it was a mistake that Newstart recipients missed out?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I wanted to see it passed through the Parliament and that's what you have to do to be pragmatic.

INTERVIEWER: I see, so you made the change so it would be passed through Parliament?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: OK, very fast trains.

PRIME MINISTER: Better than very slow trains, Tom.

INTERVIEWER: Well that's true, if they’re a reality.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's a very good point.

INTERVIEWER: So, I mean, I spoke at a Budget breakfast this morning and I mentioned I'd seen a picture of Malcolm and Tammy Fraser in 1978 getting on board a Japanese bullet train and saying, “This is what we need for Australia.” That was over 40 years ago now. This time around are you actually going to build one?

PRIME MINISTER: Well our form is there for people to see. There are two other very big generationally-delayed projects which we’re now getting on with. One of those is of course the Melbourne Airport Link and that heads of agreement has been signed with the state government with Dan Andrews. That was what we announced in last year's Budget, so we're getting on with that. Up in Sydney, the Western Sydney International Airport has been talked about for 45 or 50 years and we're getting on with that. The dozers are on the ground and it's becoming a reality. So I understand that people can be cynical about these very big projects. That's why we decided in this Budget, we didn’t say we were going ahead with five of these things. We said this is the one you can actually do. The State Government has been doing work on this, we're going to do a bit more work on it. We've got $2 billion down to make it a reality and it's the one that we can actually demonstrate our credentials on.

INTERVIEWER: Sorry which one is that? The one to the airport or the one to Geelong?

PRIME MINISTER: This is Geelong to Melbourne, the Fast Rail. The Melbourne Airport Link, that's already happening, we're moving ahead on it.

INTERVIEWER: OK so the very fast train to Geelong and back, that's a reality? Or will soon be a reality?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah it will be, both the State Government ourselves have been working towards that. It'll follow a very similar path.

INTERVIEWER: You can understand the cynicism though?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, sure.

INTERVIEWER: Because we've talked so much over the years about fast trains, they've never, I don’t think we’ve ever had a train go faster than 100 kms an hour.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we're not talking about the bullet trains like they have in Tokyo, by the way.  That's not what this proposal is. It is a fast train, it's not the bullet trains that you see overseas. This is a half an hour journey between Melbourne and Geelong instead of a one hour journey. We're doing that business case and we'll continue to work through the technical details of that. There’s still a lot of work to do there, I mean, I've often said I think out of Melbourne you don't get these projects at a drive through, you've got to do the work. They take some time to get the planning right, because if you don't get the planning right, you end up spending a lot of money on something doesn't work.

INTERVIEWER: Now today in Parliament you said something I found a little bit odd. We'll just have a listen to it.

“I know what Borat with think of the Labour Party's policies on emissions reduction Mr Speaker; very nice, very nice.”

INTERVIEWER: Do you often quote Borat in the Federal Parliament?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: Not very often but I thought it was very appropriate, because under… this is what Labor's emissions reduction policy is - half of their carbon emissions reductions is actually forcing businesses to buy carbon credits from other places outside Australia. Honestly, I've never been a fan of these arrangements, these foreign - I mean that you've got futures carbon traders, you've got all these sort of merchant bankers moving around these sorts of things. Honestly, they're going to force $36 billion worth, that’s our conservative estimate, that they're going to force business to spend on these carbon credits. Carbon credits from Kazakhstan, so to make my point, the Borat tax is where this ends up. This is not a responsible thing to do Australian business. If you want people to earn more, they don't earn more when the business they work for has to spend billions of dollars buying carbon credits from Borat.

INTERVIEWER: Very quickly you popped up on Snapchat in the past couple of days and we in fact played one of your videos yesterday. You got a lot of likes a lot of new friends on this social media platform. 

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah look you've got to be everywhere to talk to Australians these days and of all ages. I'm happy to do that, I'm happy to meet people in the pub, I'm happy to meet them at the footy, I'm happy to meet him in a nursing home, I'm happy to meet them on Snapchat. But wherever I can engage with my fellow Australians and get across the point that we're making which is if you don't have a strong economy then your investment in the schools and the hospitals and the pharmaceuticals - I mean, last night we've listed a drug that is going to change the lives of people suffering from leukaemia, people suffering from rare forms of skin cancer - I mean these this is why we do this stuff. This is why for the last six years, we've worked so hard to get this Budget back into surplus, so we can keep doing these things.

But again - I know I started with it when we started talking Tom - but this $461 million that we're investing in combating youth suicide, with more Headspace centres a whole range of digital programs, this is something for every Australian I think. Because we're all touched by the issues of mental health and particularly by youth mental health. This is the way you confront it and we're funding that. I would call it my biggest priority in this Budget.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, speaking of footy, last time you and I spoke in person I gave you a Carlton football jumper and made you a member of the club. How do you think the Blues will go against the Swans at Marvel Stadium this Saturday?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well I think the Swans will win, but I'm no expert mate.

INTERVIEWER: What?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m no expert. We’ll put the tips in but I was there for the Swans game against Richmond, but they had I say seem to be coming good in that that second quarter and the third quarter, it unravelled a bit. I was there with Josh. I'll tell you what, Josh was pretty excited. It was fun going to the footy with Josh actually, I quite enjoyed it.

But look, I enjoy the spectacle you know and I've had a lot of a lot more people give me a lot more jumpers since then. But how good was the fact that the women's AFL grand final on the weekend set that record crowd for a women's sporting event? Was it 45,000?

INTERVIEWER: 53,000 or 54,000.

PRIME MINISTER: 54,000, how good is that?

INTERVIEWER: Well it was a great crowd, a record crowd for a women's AFL match. I know you’ve got to go, a busy day. Thank you so much for joining us.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you mate, cheers.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison, Prime Minister of Australia.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister Scott Morrison, good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: G'day, Michael.

INTERVIEWER: Isn't this the most nakedly political budget in Australian history?

PRIME MINISTER: Michael, this is our economic plan to ensure that our economy is built strong over the next decade and that Australians have the opportunities that they're seeking for themselves, because this is a Budget that is backing hardworking Australians. It's a fair go for those who have a go, that's what underpins this Budget. As Australians continue to do the hard work, then they'll get the rewards for their hard work. That's what the Liberal and National Parties have always done and that's what has enabled us to bring the Budget back to a surplus budget for next year. That's the first time we have seen that in a decade.

We're going to invest that surplus in infrastructure and services. $461 million to combat youth suicide in this country, that's what a budget surplus and a stronger economy can do to tackle what I think is one of the biggest social and health challenges we have in this country.

INTERVIEWER: It's a promise of a surplus of $7 billion next financial year, but how robust is that promise given as we saw in the Budget documents last night, very considerable risks from overseas and risks here care of those falling house prices. How confident are you that you'll actually hit that Budget surplus next year and for that matter the years afterwards?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m very confident because that has been our form. I mean, last year when I delivered the Budget, what we’ve seen over the course of this year is that we’ve ended up $10 billion better and it was the same the year before. So we’ve always had these headwinds but we’ve always budgeted in a very conservative way and we have bettered the performance in the Budget consistently.

That's the difference between the Liberal and National Parties when we budget - we do it sensibly - and when the Labor Party did it, you know, they just ran up huge deficits while promising surpluses. Now, that's the big difference between the Labor Party and ourselves; we do these things carefully and responsibly. We balance reward, responsibility and reality when we put our budgets together and that's why we have seen the improvement in the performance of the Budget that we have. But that budget surplus is all about, now, investing to pay down debt and deliver the essential services in health and education. I mean, health and education funding over the last five and a half years, has increased over 60 per cent for state schools and for hospitals. That’s what we have been delivering. A 27 per cent increase in Medicare funding since we’ve come to government. This is what we have been delivering and our Budget that we handed down last night continues that investment, based on a strong economy.

INTERVIEWER: How much of this Budget, though, is aimed at neutralising Labor politically? I ask that question because the Labor Party has already vowed to match the first round of tax cuts announced last night?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, Labor makes all sorts of promises when it comes to the economy but their record speaks for itself. What this is about is our plan for the decade that we're going to live in. The decade that people are going to run businesses in, that people are going to find work in. 80,000 apprentices funded to support our growing economy and help people get into work and build the big infrastructure projects that we have got rolling out. $100 billion of important investments in infrastructure, whether it's the $500 million that we're putting into the Princes Highway, that notorious stretch of road down on the south coast of New South Wales, or the funds we're funding in Fast Rail from Melbourne to Geelong, $2 billion, which is going to ease population pressures in our big cities.

This is what our plan is doing; it's about growing our economy, taking the tax burden, taking the tax monkey off people's backs - not just for some as Labor promise and they only promise it - but for all. See, the Labor Party always wants to say they’ve got to bring some people down to lift people up. We don't in believe in that. We believe that the Australian economy performs better when all Australians are rewarded for doing better. Labor wants to punish some and we’re not that in business. We're in the business of rewarding and supporting all Australians.

INTERVIEWER: Let's talk about lifting the poorest people up. In a Budget boasting $45 billion worth of surpluses Prime Minister over four years, why was there no scope at all to raise the Newstart Allowance?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, what we're doing for people who are looking for jobs is getting them into work. The difference about Newstart Allowance is that people on Newstart aren't intended to be there for a long period of time and they also have access to a range of other income support payments. The Newstart Allowance is indexed twice a year, just like all other welfare payments, it's not frozen. It goes up actually twice a year and that's what is built into the Budget going forward.

INTERVIEWER: It is a measly figure, $277 a week. Even Arthur Sinodinos, your colleague on Q&A on Monday was saying it needs to go up.

PRIME MINISTER: He didn't say now, I stress, he did not say it needed to go up now. He said that's something you consider down the track, but what we're doing is getting those people in record numbers who are on Newstart, into jobs. That's the best form of welfare, Michael. Actually to get people into a job and under our Government, that's what has been happening in record numbers, particularly for young people.

Under our Government, we had the biggest year of employment growth for 15 to 24-year-olds. That changes lives. We have had 1.2 million jobs created since we have come to government and our pledge for a further 1.25 million jobs over the next five years, is backed in by the economic plan that we outlined and we handed down last night.

A Budget back into surplus for the first time in 12 years that now is invested in paying down debt and investing in things like youth mental health, investing in supporting carers to get respite, in record funding for hospitals and for schools. These are the things that make the difference in people's lives.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, just about out of time. Finally, Prime Minister, we're clearly about to go into election campaign mode. Once election day rolls around, isn't the only surplus Australian voters will be concerned about is the surplus of Liberal prime ministers over the last six years?

PRIME MINISTER: I think that's what the bubble worries about. But what Australians are going to decide at the next election –

INTERVIEWER: You don't think voters will look back and discount you for all the… for the muppet show, your words, we saw last year?

PRIME MINISTER: I think what they're going to do at the next election is decide who they want to continue to lead the country over the next three years. We changed the rules when I became Prime Minister, we changed the rules in our Party. So at this election, be very sure about this, there's a choice; myself as the leader of the Liberal Party together with the Nationals to lead the country for another three years and keep our economy strong and secure our future. Or, you can have Bill Shorten and the Labor Party with their higher taxes.

You vote for Bill Shorten, you are guaranteed Bill Shorten. You vote for me, Scott Morrison as Prime Minister, you are guaranteed me.  So the choice is about the future. The choice is always about the future in an election and our future, the economy that we will continue to lead, is one where Australians will have better opportunities, higher wages, more growth, more employment, a better future and stronger services.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, really appreciate your time, thank you so much for joining News Breakfast.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot, Michael.

INTERVIEWER: The leader of the Liberal Party, the Coalition and Prime Minister of Australia, Mr Morrison good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Jon.

INTERVIEWER: Is it a moral fail to build an election surplus off starving the National Disability Insurance Scheme of money, leaving disabled people without the services they need?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's a terrible lie, Jon.

INTERVIEWER: What is?

PRIME MINISTER: What you've just said.

INTERVIEWER: What part of it?

PRIME MINISTER: All of it.

INTERVIEWER: None of it.

PRIME MINISTER: All of what you've said is untrue. Let me explain why.

INTERVIEWER: The NDIS has been starved of funds and it hasn’t met –

PRIME MINISTER: No that’s not right Jon.

PRIME MINISTER: What you yourselves said would be its allocated money and people are desperate for services and not getting them.

PRIME MINISTER: Let me explain what happens with the NDIS. What happens is based on estimates that are provided by the states working with the Commonwealth to understand what the expected demand is, then you pay out what the services are that are provided in response to that demand. Now, we overestimated the demand in the NDIS. That money actually shows up in extra expenditure on hospitals where a lot of those services are being provided through the state. So it's just swings and roundabouts.

INTERVIEWER: Well no, you've squeezed the pipe.

PRIME MINISTER: No, not at all. Jon, that’s just out and out wrong, that's not how it works. The NDIS is funded on a complete demand-based system. Every single invoice for every single service, every one presenting for a service, it's all funded. It's all funded not just next year, this year, but into the future. What happens is -

INTERVIEWER: Mr Morrison, we’ve spoken to the providers, they do not have the cash flow allocated in order to meet the demand.

PRIME MINISTER: We've just increased the payment and for providers.

INTERVIEWER: For the future, but not for the past.

PRIME MINISTER: That's what's been done.

INTERVIEWER: Not for the past, hence the surplus.

PRIME MINISTER: Jon I’m sorry, I've got to stop you there because you cannot tell those lies to the Australian people.

INTERVIEWER: It's not a lie.

PRIME MINISTER: No, it is a lie Jon. Because every single cent that needs to go to the NDIS, every single demand that is there for the NDIS -

INTERVIEWER: [Inaudible] go, doesn’t it?

PRIME MINISTER: Every single service that's provided and sought -

INTERVIEWER: No, not every one that is sought.

PRIME MINISTER: No, I'm sorry, Jon. I'm sorry, every demand for the NDIS is fully funded. There are no policy decisions in relation to the NDIS other than every single element of the demand is fully funded. What happens is if you get a lower demand on the NDIS, then you get higher expenses in the hospital system. And so these are the same patients and they're getting the same support, they're getting it through a different system.

INTERVIEWER: No, they’re not. A lot of them are not hospital patients.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m sorry Jon, you’ve got this absolutely wrong.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, they're not hospital patients, they're not admitted, they're not outpatients.

PRIME MINISTER: But they are paid for through the health system Jon.

INTERVIEWER: They’re not clients of hospitals at all. They’re paid through community organisations and charities and they need more money.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m sorry Jon, you cannot put that falsehood up just because that's what the Labor Party is saying -

INTERVIEWER: It’s also what the providers are saying -

PRIME MINISTER: Again, if you want to repeat the lies of the Labor Party to your listeners -

INTERVIEWER: It’s not the Labor Party, it’s the people who work their fingers to the bone for the disabled.

PRIME MINISTER: You can do that, but if we’re going to have a debate, we can have a debate or we can have an interview.

INTERVIEWER: Well we can have both actually, I'm trying to explore one of the major issues in the Budget.

PRIME MINISTER: And you’ve got it wrong, Jon.

INTERVIEWER: All right well let's move on to other things but I'm basing my beliefs not on what the Labor Party have briefed us on.

PRIME MINISTER: Well there’s an uncanny coincidence

INTERVIEWER: But the disability sector, it’s what the disability sector have put in their own press releases. Let's move on. If indeed on tax and macroeconomic settings alike there's little difference between the parties now, does this election become a contest of leadership, where of course you have a significant advantage in the polls and the different opinion polls on Bill Shorten?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s a contest of both. It is a contest about who's best to lead the country going forward and it is also about the record of our Government, which has seen hospital funding increase by 63 per cent since we were first elected. Schools funding for public schools has increased by 62 per cent. Medicare funding increased by 27 per cent, a Budget that -

INTERVIEWER: All these figures of course are contested by your opponents.

PRIME MINISTER: No they’re not contested, they're the hard facts of what has occurred since we were elected until now. They are the financial accounts of the nation, Jon. They're not contested, they're actual facts. That is what we've done with hospitals, schools and Medicare. We also have the highest bulk-billing rate in the country on record. That is our record on health and services.

But the other thing we've done last night, Jon, I'm sure you'd agree with this - we disagree on things from time to time, I'm sure your listeners understand and they know it's good natured - but $461 million dollars to invest in combating youth suicide and the youth mental health challenge in this country. From the most remote Indigenous communities to the suburbs of our big cities, that is what a strong economy and a balanced Budget can do.

INTERVIEWER: Desperately needed. Just a few things, we’ll come to infrastructure in a moment which is a very welcome commitment from your Government. Do you commit to Bill Shorten making his Budget reply?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I did that ages ago.

INTERVIEWER: You won't call the election this evening then?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: And then Friday?

PRIME MINISTER: I committed to that last year Jon, why would that change?

INTERVIEWER: Because the rumor mill runs hot as I'm sure you're aware.

PRIME MINISTER: You shouldn’t pay attention to the bubble Jon, you’ve been around too long to pay attention to the bubble.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Every now and again there's one that goes past and you go; “Ooh, that would be interesting”. So having got that sorted, Geelong in particular.

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

INTERVIEWER: The commitments to try and save Sarah Henderson in the very marginal Victorian seat of Corangamite. When does the money for Geelong Fast Rail start to flow?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, once we've completed the business case. When we were down there launching it the other day, we expect that to be in about 18 months to two years.

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, the business case?

PRIME MINISTER: No, the business case needs to be done which works out the most effective way to do this, that's the first stage of the plan.

INTERVIEWER: When does that start?

PRIME MINISTER: That starts now.

INTERVIEWER: $20 million for year one, starting right now?

PRIME MINISTER: That starts right away.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah and then?

PRIME MINISTER: Then when we put that together, it works exactly like we work the Melbourne Airport Rail Link. As you know, we announced that in last year's Budget and were able to conclude the agreement, $5 billion each with Dan Andrews and the Victorian Government and ourselves. This will follow exactly the same process, working closely together, because the Victorian Government, as you know, has already done quite a lot of work on this. So we'll align those two pieces of work and we'll get moving as quickly as we come to that agreement with the State Government. We look forward to doing that and I have every confidence that we will. We’re working very well with Dan Andrews.

INTERVIEWER: But you’re press conference the other day with lots of people in fluoro vests and hard hats - and we're going to see more of that - you said it can start in 18 months, but in fact, the cash flow doesn't kick in until 2021?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we can. It's a function of getting the business case landed and it's a function of getting the agreement together with the State Government.

INTERVIEWER: So how can it start in 18 months when cash flow starts in three years?

PRIME MINISTER: Jon, as soon as we can get it moving, we'll begin moving. That's exactly what we're doing and we'll do it with the State Government and we're moving on all these projects. There is $6.2 billion for new projects to bust congestion, improve safety and better connect towns and regions all across Victoria. This is a huge boost.

INTERVIEWER: I'm just trying to drill down, Prime Minister, because in fact it can't start in 18 months if the cash flow isn't kicking till the 1st of July 2021.

PRIME MINISTER: Jon, if we're in a position to start earlier, we will.

INTERVIEWER: And the duplication to Waurn Ponds, allocating $50 million over four years, but it's a $750 million project.

PRIME MINISTER: We've allocated $700 million to the Waurn Ponds upgrade.

INTERVIEWER: $50 million in four years, the rest might follow.

PRIME MINISTER: $700 million to upgrade that project, that's what we've committed in this Budget. That's what we've committed, $700 million.

INTERVIEWER: So the actual expenditure is not just beyond the forward estimates of this Budget, but within them.

PRIME MINISTER: There is expenditure now and there's expenditure over 10 years, it's a big project Jon. You can't upgrade the Waurn Ponds line by going through a drive through at McDonald's, you've got to do the planning, you've got to get it done you've got to work with the state government. I don't think people expect these projects to be done overnight. But you've got to turn up and provide the funds and that's what we're doing.

INTERVIEWER: So do you borrow the credibility that was built by the Andrews government and their model that led to them being re-elected? Do you say, well, we haven't really done that much for infrastructure in Victoria for the last few years, but forgive us, we've realised that the error of our ways and we're going to do it now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's not true either, Jon. I mean you've got to stop saying this stuff, we've been delivering billions of dollars of infrastructure projects in Victoria and we're going to continue to deliver billions of dollars

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, your main commitment was for a tunnel the people of Victoria people voted against twice in elections.

PRIME MINISTER: For these projects, so we’re just going to keep getting on with it, Jon. We're investing in infrastructure, we're investing in infrastructure in Victoria and particularly in Melbourne which is straining with the pressures of population and ensuring that we're delivering the projects. Whether it's on the Hume Freeway, the $50 million there, for the M80 Ring Road, the Calder Freeway, the Gap Road, the M80 Ring Road, that's $50 million, the Ballarto Road at Skye which is $30 million, the Princes Highway intersection upgrades at Pakenham to Beaconsfield, that's s$17.8 million.

INTERVIEWER: This is what governments do, of course Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: We’re doing all of these things Jon.

INTERVIEWER: That’s why we vote for governments, to do things.

PRIME MINISTER: That's exactly what we're doing Jon.

INTERVIEWER: But do you have a credibility problem, not just on infrastructure where Victorians for years have been calling for more investment from the Commonwealth, but for instance your apprenticeships announcement. Billions cut from TAFE over years and years and suddenly now you say you'll put some of that back?

PRIME MINISTER: We established the Skilling Australians Fund last year Jon, that was in last year's Budget. We've been investing in these skills each and every year. As you know, the training programs are delivered particularly by state governments when it comes to TAFE. 80,000 new apprentices, we're going to need them because we're building a lot of roads and a lot of bridges and we're building our economy. That's why we're investing in those with the increased incentives for employers and for those taking on apprenticeships. But not just that -

INTERVIEWER: But where's your credibility on apprenticeships, if you've in fact, as you have, been cutting TAFE? You may have been putting money into private training up providers.

PRIME MINISTER: State governments fund TAFE, Jon. State governments fund TAFE.

INTERVIEWER: Well specifically with monies allocated from the Commonwealth.

PRIME MINISTER: They're substantially funded by state governments. They're the responsibility of state governments and what we're doing here - I mean, I've seen people pour money into those programs and TAFE and not get the outcomes.

INTERVIEWER: Absolutely, rorts and rip-offs, many of them.

PRIME MINISTER: The great mistakes that is often made it that you just throw buckets of money into state government programs and they produce results. Now, particularly in the area of skills development, I haven't seen those results. We've been investing year in year out in those state government programs all around the country and we haven't been seeing the results. So we've decided to take more direct action when it comes to investing in skills through these programs, by investing in the incentives provided to employers and to those taking up apprenticeships to make sure they can get out there.

So 80,000 in the most needed trades and we're looking forward to backing them in to do that, over half a billion dollars in this Budget to do just that.

INTERVIEWER: I don't want to make you late for your next commitment but just finally, extending the energy supplement to Newstart seems like an afterthought that was announced by the Treasurer on radio this morning, not in the Budget.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I want to see it passed through the Parliament and that's what is going to happen.

INTERVIEWER: Was it an afterthought?

PRIME MINISTER: That will be in the Government's bill this morning when it's introduced into the House -

INTERVIEWER: Was it an afterthought?

PRIME MINISTER: No it's in the bill and it's the Government's policy.

INTERVIEWER: But it wasn't in the Budget.

PRIME MINISTER: Jon, we’re getting it done.

INTERVIEWER: An afterthought.

PRIME MINISTER: I'll tell you why it's important. Because this year's Budget, the year we're currently in, which was the Budget I handed down last year, we have bettered what I said a year ago by around about $10 billion and in the previous year, we did exactly the same thing. So with our Government, when we hand down budgets, we outperform them in the 12 months that follow, because we use conservative estimates. We balance reward with responsibility and reality when we put our budgets together and that's why Australians trust us.

People know Labor can't manage money and they can't trust Labor to deliver tax cuts, legislated tax cuts. We're providing that relief and we're providing the economic leadership. So there’s a very clear choice at the next election; Bill Shorten and the Labor Party - and we all know what that is. Or you can have my Party with me leading it at the next election and there’s a very clear choice.

INTERVIEWER: Just finally Prime Minister, I'm trying to organise a birthday party for Jan my wife and her birthday is May the 11th, should I go ahead?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I’m going to be busy all the way through mate, be busy all the way through. When we announce the election, you'll know when it is.

[Laughter]

And was that an invitation?

INTERVIEWER: Well yeah, absolutely, drop on by.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s very kind.

INTERVIEWER: If you've got nothing else on, you’re always welcome.

PRIME MINISTER: I'll send a videogram.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: She would love that, thank you indeed.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you, Jon.

INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister of Australia Scott Morrison.

INTERVIEWER: So will you put One Nation last now in the seat of Cook?

PRIME MINISTER: I've already answered that question previously. We will be determining that at the time of nominations closing, because frankly, there are many candidates for who should go last. You won't know all those names and all those individuals and all those parties, until nominations close. I have been very consistent about this. Under our Party's structure, those decisions are made at the time of nominations closing. I said that last week, my position hasn't changed. But I'm not after peoples' preferences, I'm after their primaries.

INTERVIEWER: Will you advise the LNP in Queensland to put One Nation below Labor and the Greens?

PRIME MINISTER: I just answered that question.

INTERVIEWER: You didn't, Prime Minister, with respect, you didn’t.

PRIME MINISTER: I said we will make those decisions at the time of nominations closing, Stephen, and that’s when we’re going to do that.

INTERVIEWER: What will your recommendation to the Party be?

PRIME MINISTER: That will be made known at the time, once we see all the nominations. See, tell me this; Fraser Anning runs a candidate in Queensland in every single seat, who goes last?

INTERVIEWER: Will you run him below Labor?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I’m asking. When we know who all the candidates are, then that's when I will make my decision and the Party will make its decision about where the preferences go.

But let me tell you this about the Greens. We have stopped 15 terrorist attacks here in Australia. The Greens have opposed us on almost every single piece of national security legislation that we have put forward into the Parliament. The Greens are in favour of death taxes. Now do you think the Labor Party should be putting the Greens ahead of the Liberal Party? Fair question. There are plenty of extreme views out there and those extreme views that are a danger to Australia, are not hostage to the left or the right of Australian politics. So I'm not competing for preferences, this is the point that the bubble never understands. I'm in this race as the Prime Minister to be re-elected and the way you seek to do that in this country, is to not squabble over preferences. We saw that with the Labor Party in New South Wales and the Shooters and Fishers Party on the weekend. I mean how long did it take Bill Shorten to denounce the comments made by Michael Daley in New South Wales? One Nation called it out before him, Mark Latham called it out before Bill Shorten did. The Labor Party went to the last election in New South Wales with a leader who said “Asian migrants take your jobs” and Bill Shorten was as quiet as a lamb.

So I'm not going to take lectures from a Labor Party that can't even call out that sort of behaviour from the leader of their party in New South Wales that they wanted to be Premier.

INTERVIEWER: On energy in north and central Queensland, is that limited to underwriting or could subsidies be a part of that program?

PRIME MINISTER: In North Queensland, what we’re looking to do is establish what is the most viable approach. There are no proposals for us to invest in those projects. What we have always been looking at is the underwriting provisions that can assist in those projects, gathering finance. But we’ll look at the case studies.

The key point is this; what is the most effective, most sustainable and most affordable and reliable way to save the jobs and keep the jobs of people working in north and central Queensland? We will take the best answer and once we know what that best answer is - and this project will be able to determine that once and for all.

INTERVIEWER: So you wouldn't rule out subsidies?

PRIME MINISTER: We have no plans for subsidies at all, no, we don't have such a plan. What we have a plan to do, is work out what's the best project and then work out what is the best way to make that project happen. The only things we presently have in our toolkit are the underwriting powers on price, which is what we would be applying if those other projects were successful.

INTERVIEWER: On social media, you mentioned the campaigns to blacklist companies. Is that a suggestion that you would ask social media or require social media to try to crack down on those kinds of ‘boycott movements,’ like Sleeping Giants?

PRIME MINISTER: All I'm simply saying is that social media is often weaponised. Weaponised to damage peoples' business, damage their lives, involve themselves in hatred and any of these sorts of issues. I think they're the negative elements of social media. I'm simply highlighting the fact that that's what happens in this country and it happens in countries all around the world. The one I'm most interested in right now, is making sure that these companies make their products safe by ensuring that, particularly in the case of terrorism, that it’s not weaponised to be actually part of the process of inflicting the terror, not just on a country but on the world.

INTERVIEWER:: The Prime Minister is with me, Scott Morrison good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning. Good to be here.

INTERVIEWER:: Have you got little lights you can put on your car so you can come roaring down the middle of the road?

PRIME MINISTER: [Laughter] I'll struggle through the traffic like every other Australian does here in Melbourne, that’s why we’ve got to bust this congestion.

INTERVIEWER:: Okay, get to that in a moment.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER:: We're into an election campaign, can you give me four or five words, what is your pitch, what your slogan? Why should we vote for you?

PRIME MINISTER: Under the Australia I'll continue to lead, our economy will be stronger, Australians will be safer and I'll continue to bring Australians together. Without a strong economy, you cannot pay for the hospitals and schools that you need. Under Bill Shorten, the economy will be weaker.

INTERVIEWER:: Four or five words then, it’s; “stronger economy, safer Australia, come together”? 

PRIME MINISTER: That's it.

INTERVIEWER:: Have you got the slogan yet? Or that’s it?

PRIME MINISTER: [Laughter] I'll leave that to others, but that's what I've been talking about from the day I became Prime Minister. Those three things Neil, you’ll probably recall, in that first press conference I did, that's what I wanted to do; keep our economy strong, keep Australians safe and keep bringing Australians together.

INTERVIEWER:: The polls aren't good, you didn't get any real bounce from that offshore processing issue and that was pushed pretty hard. Do you still recon you can win?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes absolutely, because this is the stark choice; I mean when your economy is facing stiff headwinds that we are – yesterday unemployment came down to the lowest level in seven years, 4.9 per cent, youth unemployment down to the lowest level in seven years - our economy facing headwinds is going to put all that at risk. So you don't hand the wheel, the economic wheel, to someone who doesn't know how to drive. That's the Labor Party.

INTERVIEWER:: Still, a lot of people say it's going to happen, all the polls say it's going to happen.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that’s what they say.

INTERVIEWER:: They’re all wrong?

PRIME MINISTER: The polls always say this and people say this and that about the polls. But you know who gets to decide? Australians, when they turn up to vote.

INTERVIEWER:: We change prime minister on the basis of the polls.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the basis of who is elected at the next election, that's going to be done by the Australian people. They will get to have their say in May.

INTERVIEWER:: Speaking of that, is Malcolm Turnbull going to campaign for the Government?

PRIME MINISTER: He already is.

INTERVIEWER:: [Laughter] No he’s not. In Flinders? Ask Greg Hunt about that.

PRIME MINISTER: No, he's been supporting particularly Dave Sharma in Wentworth.

INTERVIEWER:: Okay, so he will be out there campaigning for you?

PRIME MINISTER: In the seat, I assume he’ll be out there in Wentworth supporting Dave.

INTERVIEWER:: Have you asked him to keep his head down a bit, not cause trouble?

PRIME MINISTER: We haven't had that conversation.

INTERVIEWER:: Do you think he will?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't feel the need to have that conversation.

INTERVIEWER:: Don’t you?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER::  Well, he’s campaigning against one of your ministers in Flinders.

PRIME MINISTER: He’s been nowhere near Flinders.

INTERVIEWER:: Ohh, what about his statement? Yes, alright. One Nation, I saw ad nauseam on The Project last night, you're not going to commit to putting them below Labor in the preferences, at this stage anyway. There’s no decision?

PRIME MINISTER: Well hang on, we’ve just got a process Neil. We'll make that decision in accordance with our normal process, not because the Labor Party wants to go around, you know, trying to force us into making decisions. I mean at the last election that it was the Labor Party that benefited from One Nation preferences, to win seats like Longman and Dobell. So it's a bit rich for the Labor Party to go around giving us lectures, particularly on the same day when they've got the leader of the Labor Party of New South Wales Michael Daley saying that Asian immigrants take our jobs.

INTERVIEWER::  Well the union movement has also said; “put the Liberals last”.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the union movement, yeah. Look we're not going to take lectures from the Labor Party on this. We will make the decision the way we always do and we're certainly not going to do any deals with them. I mean we've got the Labor Party doing deals with the Shooters Party up in my home state.

INTERVIEWER:: And you won't do deals with the Shooters?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER:: Will you preference them?

PRIME MINISTER: We won't do any deals with them, so that means –

INTERVIEWER:: So you haven't decided on preferences there either.

PRIME MINISTER: No, it'll just be done when we know who the nominees are, because we learned this; we've had people with very extreme views pop up in all sorts of seats. So you know, let's just wait to see who nominates and then we'll make the decision in the normal way.

INTERVIEWER:: Well, look at that One Nation beast. Pauline Hanson, is she a racist? 

PRIME MINISTER: Look Pauline has expressed extremely strong views on these issues over a long period of time. I must say in more recent times particularly in this term of Parliament we've worked closely with Pauline on a lot of important issues - issues like family court issues, which I know she feels very passionately about. I think it's pretty easy to sort of say - and I'm not suggesting you're saying this Neil - but just go; “Well, they’ve got a view on this and they've got nothing to contribute on any other issue”.

INTERVIEWER:: But don’t they?

PRIME MINISTER: I tend to deal with people on the issues they present to me and Pauline has never raised or come to me over those issues. What she has been coming to me about, is things like how welfare is spent and ensuring there's integrity in the welfare system and she has very deep concerns about the way the family court system works.

INTERVIEWER:: She is described today as a racist and a bigot. Is that fair?

PRIME MINISTER: Look what I said last Monday when I was here in Melbourne is, I don't think it helps that we constantly go back to just herding people into tribes and seeking to create further conflict around this stuff. I want us to all step back from all that. I want to step back from all the name-calling. I want us to step back and say; “How about we just deal with the issues that are in front of us and stop treating politics like a sport, where you have to pick sides and throw rocks?”

INTERVIEWER:: Well, let's look at One Nation the Party then. Do One Nation policies represent Australian values or are they at odds with Australian values? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well they’re not ones that exist certainly within my Party. 

INTERVIEWER:: Are they anti-Australian in their values?

PRIME MINISTER: I said last night that I think there is a lack of knowledge, or awareness or understanding particularly when it comes to Islam in Australia. It can be sort of stereotyped, I think there's no doubt about that. I think it's the job of leaders such as myself to improve that understanding. But the question is are all of their policies or their policies inconsistent with Australian values, well, many of their policies are not policies I would share.

INTERVIEWER:: Which ones?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't share their views when it comes to how they see a role for big government in this country. I don't share their views for intervening in so many different parts with additional regulation and things like that. When it comes to their views on immigration and the fact that they believe that, you know, it’s certain types of people in the immigration program which are the issue. So, I've never shared those values -

INTERVIEWER:: Isn’t that itself racist? If you base immigration on race?

PRIME MINISTER: Well Neil, what I'm not going to do today - which is I think what you're inviting me to do -

INTERVIEWER:: Well I mean I’m interested, you’re tiptoeing around One Nation. Why are you being so careful?

PRIME MINISTER: Because I don't think it helps Neil, for us to just get into this slanging match between all of the personalities here. What happened last Friday was abominable and I think the right response in relation to that, is not to get into tit-for-tat between political parties and start with; “This person is this”, or “that person is that” and “they’re to blame for this” and “they're to blame for that”.

I think the right thing to do is to reach out to the Muslim community and give them a big hug. The right thing for me to do is to turn up at a Coptic Church on Sunday with my family and pray for the victims in a Christian church that actually knows quite a lot about being impacted by these sorts of attacks. I think the right thing to do is for me to stand up in Melbourne and say; “Hey, how about we treat each other as individuals and not members of groups and try and set them against each other for public entertainment?”

INTERVIEWER:: Well, do you think Pauline Hanson supports you on that philosophy?

PRIME MINISTER: I have no idea, I have never discussed it with her.

INTERVIEWER:: You don’t care?

PRIME MINISTER: It's not for me to have a view about that, it's for her to have a view about what she does. She is accountable, as is her party, as is every party, for their own decisions and all the things that they say. I'm responsible for what the Liberal Party does and what my Government does.

INTERVIEWER:: True, true, but you will to an extent be judged on your reaction to parties like this. I mean you were quite happy to take Fraser Anning’s head off for what he did.

PRIME MINISTER: Which was abominable.

INTERVIEWER:: Which was obscene and which was wrong, but sometimes Pauline Hanson … she won’t even condemn Fraser Anning. 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I certainly don't agree with her on that, that's for sure.

INTERVIEWER:: But you can take his head off, you won’t take hers off.

PRIME MINISTER: I absolutely didn’t agree with what she did in the Parliament, when she wore the burqa to Parliament. I thought that disrespected the Parliament and you know, we made those comments at the time. So look, again Neil, I don't think it helps the debate if we make it about the personalities. I think what helps the debate is by being constructive.

Yesterday I was down at Punt Road with Bachar Houli and we announced $15 million dollars for the project we've got going down there, not just with his leadership program with Muslim Australians, but also for young Indigenous kids. That's what we should be doing.

INTERVIEWER:: The reason I did raise it by the way, is Kevin Rudd has tweeted; “It's appalling that Morrison,” you, “can't simply state Liberals and Nationals, put One Nation last. Hanson’s racism and religious bigotry is as clear as day. What about some leadership, Morrison?” Not Mr Morrison either.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, Kevin Rudd doesn't get to make decisions for the Liberal Party. We have a process for making our decisions. As our record shows, we're in the Senate, we didn't preference them in the Senate last time, that's what our actions are. Labor got people elected on the basis of One Nation preferences last election. Michael Daly thinks Asian immigrants take Australians jobs. I haven't heard Kevin Rudd call out Michael Daly.

INTERVIEWER:: No.

PRIME MINISTER: Or Bill Shorten for that matter, by the way.

INTERVIEWER:: What has Bill Shorten done? Is he racist? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well why has Bill Shorten not disassociated himself with the comments of Michael Daly in New South Wales?

INTERVIEWER:: On the Asians?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, why not? You’ll remember when John Howard many years ago was attacked for those things, a long, long time ago.

INTERVIEWER:: Yeah I remember.

PRIME MINISTER: Labor had a lot to say about that, so where is Bill Shorten today? Tanya Plibersek? Anthony Albanese? When it comes to the leader of the Labor Party in the New South Wales Parliament –

INTERVIEWER:: Well, for the same reasons you won’t bag One Nation, it's political.

PRIME MINISTER: I'm sorry, this is his own Party.

INTERVIEWER:: It’s politically difficult, it’s the middle of an election.

PRIME MINISTER: This is the leader of the Labor Party in New South Wales who was has said Asians are going to take people’s jobs. 

INTERVIEWER:: A fast trail to Geelong. You've talked about $2 billion dollars towards it. You'll need, when it comes in, you’ll need the sky rail, a tunnel or acquisition, which will it be?

PRIME MINISTER: Well this is the business case that is now going to be developed.

INTERVIEWER:: Oh so this is just a business case?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it's $2 billion down, to actually make sure the project can proceed based on the business case that has to be developed. It's no different to what we did when we announced the Melbourne Airport Rail Link. At that stage we didn't have a preferred route, now we do have a preferred route. We have a heads of agreement between Dan Andrews and ourselves.

INTERVIEWER:: But you’d agree it’s going to have to be one of those three? It can't just arrive at the edge of the city and go from 160 to 20.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, sure.

INTERVIEWER:: You’d either need sky rail, or a tunnel, or acquisition.

PRIME MINISTER: And that’s what the process will determine.

INTERVIEWER:: When will we be in it, when will it be running?

PRIME MINISTER: Well our best estimate at the moment is that within about two years we should be able to start construction. There's a lot to be achieved over that time and I know the State Government has already been working on this. That's one of the reasons why it's the project that we've decided proceed with. But let me put it in perspective, what this project is all about. On Wednesday I announced together with Alan Tudge and David Coleman, a population plan for Australia's future. Now that is about having the right and balanced migration settings. But it's also about having the infrastructure we need to support population growth. This project is a critical example of the sort of infrastructure we need to ensure our cities can grow.

INTERVIEWER:: So is it ten years off?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we have to wait for the business case to be done.

INTERVIEWER:: So the business case is two years off?

PRIME MINISTER: No the business case will be done more quickly than that, then you need to get into the advanced planning works. Then you need to get the tenders and then you need to start construction. I mean you can't go –

INTERVIEWER:: It sounds ten years off.

PRIME MINISTER: Well you can't go into the McDonald's drive through and get yourself a fast rail to Melbourne. You can get a few other things I notice - 

INTERVIEWER:: [Laughter] I did want to come back to that.

PRIME MINISTER: Look, these are big projects Neil, they can't just be done by yesterday afternoon and they don't start unless the Commonwealth in this case, is prepared to make this sort of a commitment of $2 billion, which we have and we'll work with the State government.

I think we're demonstrating that on Melbourne Airport Link. We took the initiative there, to put our $5 billion down, this time last year and it's moving towards becoming reality.

INTERVIEWER:: So you like the idea of Geelong being like a suburb of Melbourne?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it's a satellite city and it has been.

INTERVIEWER:: Yeah, they wouldn’t like that.

PRIME MINISTER: It's a city in its own right.

INTERVIEWER:: And Albury Wodonga, you want to have a look at a business case?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, we’ve got a series of them.

INTERVIEWER:: [Inaudible].

PRIME MINISTER: We’ve got a series, there's Terralgon, there’s Gold Coast, there’s Wollongong and there are already projects underway that we've done, into Newcastle and out of Ballarat and a range of other projects. So we're serious about fast rail.

INTERVIEWER:: Matthew Guy did float this himself during the election campaign, didn't do him much good.

PRIME MINISTER: Well –

INTERVIEWER:: It is pretty much his plan, isn’t it, the one he floated?

PRIME MINISTER: No because what I'm announcing is an infrastructure project in the context of an entire population strategy Neil, this isn't just a one-off announcement. This is a fair dinkum plan to manage population growth, which involves migration settings, investments in social cohesion, planning frameworks with state and territory governments and local governments and congestion-busting projects of over $330 million dollars here in Victoria alone. Things like Racecourse Road where I was out there with Jason Wood, $70 million for widening Racecourse Road.

INTERVIEWER:: That’s the one in Cranbourne, not Flemington?

PRIME MINISTER: Pakenham.

 

INTERVIEWER:: Pakenham, sorry. Tax. There is a lot of discussion about minimum wages and you’d agree they’re too low?

PRIME MINISTER: Well they increased 3 percent, the minimum wage.

INTERVIEWER:: It’d be hard to live on, wouldn’t they?

PRIME MINISTER: Of course. Of course they would be but the majority of Australians don't live on the minimum wage, the majority of Australians are actually paid above award. But those who are actually on the minimum wage, 56 percent of them actually work for small and family businesses, not large businesses. Less than 10 percent of those who are on minimum wage, are actually employed by a large business, so those who actually pay those wages are small and family businesses who oftentimes - as you know Neal - when they're going through hard times, don't take a wage at all. See if you own a business, your wage is what you can take out of the business. Those small and family business owners often don’t take any wage.

INTERVIEWER:: So would you look at this? If you’re on the minimum wage, you’re paying $70 a week in tax. What about a ‘shandy deal’, employers pay them a bit and you increase the tax-free threshold, give them some back in tax?

PRIME MINISTER: We actually are delivering tax cuts. We've already legislated tax cuts.

INTERVIEWER:: How much will it give to someone on the minimum wage?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it can provide at that level, I think, it's around about a few hundred bucks.

INTERVIEWER:: A year?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER:: I'm talking almost 70 bucks a week, you take out of them now.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's not something that the Budget could sustain and what I also understand -  you know we also have a Newstart system, we have family tax benefits systems, we have a whole range of other payments and support that exist for people on low incomes. That's actually what the Fair Work Commission found –

INTERVIEWER:: Well, what –

PRIME MINISTER: Let me just, this is an important point Neil - the minimum wage isn't the only form of income that people get, who are on those minimum wages. As the Fair Work Commission has found, this work has been done, they have a range of other income supports which help them in that situation. That's what the Fair Work Commission takes into account. Now they will set the minimum wage is, it's an independent process. If I say it should go up, well, that's good.

INTERVIEWER:: I loved the fact that the child who served you at McDonalds didn't know who you were.

PRIME MINISTER: [Laughter] I think that’s great too.

INTERVIEWER:: How often do you go to Maccas?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, occasionally yeah.

INTERVIEWER:: And a pot and a parma at the pub in Malvern? How often, the health police will be onto you.

PRIME MINISTER: [Laughter] Why would they be onto me for going to the Malvern Hotel? 

INTERVIEWER:: Because you’re not allowed to eat Maccas, you’re not allowed to eat parmas, you’re not allowed to drink beer.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I’m pretty much like everyone else Neil –

INTERVIEWER:: How often at Maccas?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I’d probably pop in once or twice a month, maybe.

INTERVIEWER:: Do you have fries with it?

PRIME MINISTER: I certainly do.

INTERVIEWER:: Thickshake?

PRIME MINISTER: Nah, I don’t go a thickshake.

INTERVIEWER:: Coca Cola?

PRIME MINISTER: I just go the normal quarter-pounder meal or something like that.

INTERVIEWER:: And a Coke?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, it’s always a Coke.

INTERVIEWER:: A bucket of sugar and some fat.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, bit of that from time to time.  It’s still not illegal.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER:: It will be.

[Laughter]

Thank you very much for coming in.

PRIME MINISTER: No worries Neil.

INTERVIEWER:: The Prime Minister.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister of Australia, Scott Morrison welcome to the Project.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Waleed.

INTERVIEWER: I want to do something I never thought I would do.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah?

INTERVIEWER: Particularly in an interview with a politician. I'm going to let you set the agenda to begin with. What do you want to say?

PRIME MINISTER: It has been an extraordinary few days and you've just gotten back from New Zealand, meeting with Prime Minister Ardern, you would obviously have a keen sense of what it's like on the ground there.

These events are tectonic, they affect us all. On Friday I was in Sydney when the first news came through and at that stage it was just very unclear. We didn't really know what was happening, who it was, except for where it was happening. Obviously that was deeply distressing; in a mosque. Then as the news came through - and you get the briefings and it became crystal clear what had occurred - there was just a numbness. We all experienced it. You experienced it, we all experienced it as the news came and then the horror came, of the hatred and the ugliness that had led to this.

I have a very forthright way as you know and others know. My first response - apart from getting in contact with Prime Minister Ardern to express our deepest sympathies and to say kia kaha which as you know means “stay strong,” to our New Zealand whanau - it was to let all Australians know what had happened. To call it as it happened and what it was. To seek to bind us up.

Now in the same way – as both Prime Ministers in New Zealand and Australia - my first reaching-out was to the Muslim community. The following day I was able to meet with the Imams Council and I have many friends there and basically we hugged when we met, my friends and I. Then we spoke honestly about what had occurred and how people were feeling in the Islamic community and the feelings that were going right throughout the country. But what really impressed me was the leadership was focused on two things; they were focused on reaching out to those in New Zealand and the practical things, burials, observance of rights and so on, how that could be done and how they could assist. But the other one was to get close to their own community and help them to try and absorb and understand.

So all of us over the last four or five days, have sought to come to terms with this. It's been a very emotional time. It has reminded us I think, of the fragility of life and how quickly hate and violence can take the most important things from us.

So as I said on that first Friday night to Australians; just hug each other tonight. I think we need to keep hugging each other.

INTERVIEWER: It's an attack that has kind of, I was going to say ‘reset’ but it's least caused pause. Because if I can put it in such crude terms, the community that for 15 years or 18 years has been framed in the public imagination as a perpetrator, suddenly became the victim. The reverse was also true. So we're now having a lot of discussions about Islamophobia in Australia as well as of course in New Zealand and around the world.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

INTERVIEWER: Does Australia have an Islamophobia problem?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't know if Australians understand Islam very well and that can often lead to fear of things you don't understand. So by definition that's what it leads to, but that doesn't always translate into extremism, just like any view doesn't necessarily flow into extremism. Malcolm used to say; “Domestic violence starts with disrespect of women,” -

INTERVIEWER: But not all disrespect –

PRIME MINISTER: But not all disrespect of women leads to violence.

INTERVIEWER: I understand your point but when I ask about Islamophobia, I don’t mean just that people don’t understand and they are a bit apprehensive. I mean effectively, an ‘ideologized’ form, an approach - 

PRIME MINISTER: There's no doubt that exists in Australia, there's no doubt that exists in Australia but there’s –

INTERVIEWER: How big of a problem is it?

PRIME MINISTER:  But there's no doubt that so many forms of hatred and stereotyping goes on in the Australian community. I mean my -

INTERVIEWER: How big of a problem is this, do you think?

PRIME MINISTER:  Well, we have been tracking through our agencies, this form of extremism. Now, people use different words, I have said right-wing extremist, others have said white supremacists or white separatists. It all means the same thing ultimately. At the end of the day it's just where a view gets taken to an absolute extreme, when you're talking about supremacists and separatists.

Any community can take itself to a point where they engage in a form of fundamentalism, extremism, which is a danger to innocents. Now this is true in the Christian community, it's true in the Hindu community - in other countries I should stress, I mean we all know of violence that has occurred there - Buddhist communities, Muslim communities. Where in any of these communities, you allow fundamentalism and extremism to take hold and as a community you don't guard against that, then this is where it ends. And the great victim is innocents, the great victim is peace.

INTERVIEWER: Okay. Well let me be perhaps, more focused in the way I want to ask this. Does the Coalition have a problem with Islamophobia?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't believe the Liberal Party does and I don't believe - I can't speak for the National Party, I’ll let the leader of the Nationals –

INTERVIEWER: No, you can though, you are Prime Minister, it is your Coalition.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no I don’t believe so, I don’t believe so. But I’ll speak for myself -

INTERVIEWER: No, no, I get that you want to speak for yourself, but it is important to focus on the Coalition generally.

PRIME MINISTER: I think it’s important for all of us – and today is Harmony Day. Harmony Day is an opportunity for us, I think, to understand difference better. You know the classic wisdom; “Seek first to understand, before you understood”. I think that is one of the important lessons of Harmony Day. The problem I have is that we don't do a lot of ‘seeking to understand first’. We often jump to conclusions about others. In politics, I think it's important that we have disagreements, but I wish we could disagree better. I wish if we did disagree, that we always didn't leap to assuming other people's motives. I think that's important.

You know, you and I can disagree and you've interviewed me before, when you're in radio and years ago and we've disagreed. But I think it's really important in Australia if we want a better society, that we've got to disagree better and respect each other more and the motives of others. Not to leap to prejudiced conclusions about others.

INTERVIEWER: Sure, okay. So let me just run through some things and perhaps you can help me understand better or explain motives or whatever it might be. When you have people in your Coalition, George Christensen speaking at a Reclaim Australia rally, appearing on an alt-right podcast, speaking at a Q Society event where horrible things are said about multiple minorities. When you've got a former Prime Minister Tony Abbott saying that; “Islamophobia never killed anybody,” when actually it already had - it's not just that it was true at the time and it isn't now, it wasn’t true at the time - and suggested that when Muslim leaders condemn terrorism, they don't really mean it. ,When you have Peter Dutton suggesting that Lebanese immigration in the 70s was a mistake or that mistakes were made around it. When you have him talking about Mehreen Faruqi who is a Muslim Senator who is part of the Greens, being ‘as bad as Fraser Anning’s after the Christchurch attacks. When you have multiple, I think seven Coalition Senators shaking Fraser Anning’s hand after he gives the ‘final solution’ speech in Parliament. And when you have reports in a newspaper like The Australian that it got to the point that the head of ASIO Duncan Lewis contacted members of the Liberal Party and of the Coalition, to warn them about the way they were talking about Islam. When I aggregate all that and - there are other examples I could give - when I aggregate all that, is there something that does need to be confronted within your own Party henceforth? 

PRIME MINISTER: As leader it's my job to ensure that the tone I set, is the right tone. The tone I have set, you can you can see from my experience Waleed. I mean you may not be familiar with my experience in this area, let me tell you the story.

When I came in and the Parliament in 2007 in the seat of Cook in the southern part of Sydney, that was not long after the riots there and the revenge attacks that took place soon after. So I know what it looks like in a community, when things turn very bad and the cycle of violence is allowed to perpetuate. My predecessor Bruce Baird responded to this working with a wonderful bloke who has become a dear friend of mine Jamal Rifi. They brought the communities together by taking a whole group of young Muslim people in south-western Sydney and they trained to be lifesavers, particularly in the North Cronulla Surf Club. Now when I came into Parliament we wanted to keep up this program of bringing those two parts of Sydney together. Jason Clare, a good friend of mine and a Labor member for that part of Sydney, we decided to take young people from both of our communities and walk the Kokoda Track together, to help us understand and particularly our younger people, these two different types of cultures, what I described as “very different Australian experiences”.

Now since then, Jason I did it two more times, we walked the Sandakan death march together with a similar group and included indigenous group actually from Rob Oakeshott’s electorate at the time. We did the same thing with the Black Cat Track in 2013 and had some great young Muslim women, there some of whom were working for the AFP and again in 2015. I wasn't able to go on that one, but I helped organize one we took to Gallipoli. Now over that period of time, it has been my work in Parliament to try and build these communities together, not apart. Now that's my form Waleed and my form is to take that experience into my own Party as leader.

INTERVIEWER: But is that happening? Especially when, with that track record … I'm trying to draw you on whether or not that track record is a problem and I haven’t -

PRIME MINISTER: The best way for me to address any problem is to lead by my own example and I’ve just said –

INTERVIEWER:  Okay sure, but is that track record a problem in the first place?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there were a number of cases there that you've talked about where, you know, I've made comments on those at the time. I think there are a few in there that I'm not sure you're representing in the right light.

INTERVIEWER: Sure okay.

PRIME MINISTER: I'll give you a good example. The comments you've referred to in relation to Peter  when he talked about the immigration period in the 1980s. Now that was a humanitarian intake where there weren't the normal assessments that would be done now. There were things that were done at that time which the Immigration Department would tell you today, they would have done differently if they'd had the lessons of that period -  

INTERVIEWER: Only in relation to the Lebanese community?

PRIME MINISTER: No, they learn lessons from all sorts of areas of intake –

INTERVIEWER: So why single out the Lebanese community in that context?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm simply saying Waleed that what Peter was explaining were some lessons that were learned during a period of what was a fairly tumultuous time in the world –

INTERVIEWER: But he singled out the Lebanese community –

PRIME MINISTER: If your question to me Waleed is this - which I believe it is - do I think that every single statement by any single member of the Liberal Party -

INTERVIEWER: That’s not my question.

PRIME MINISTER: Has always been consistent -

INTERVIEWER: That’s not it's not my question.

PRIME MINISTER: Maybe you might want to rephrase it.

INTERVIEWER: No, I'll just re-ask it. Does your Party and your Coalition have a problem of Islamophobia? 

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve already –

INTERVIEWER: Given that track record of behaviour –

PRIME MINISTER: I already said to you before that no, I don't think the Party has that problem, I don't think the Liberal Party as a total group has that problem. No, I don't and I don't think the National Party does either.

I mean our Party is made up of a lot of individuals and in our Party, individuals have a lot more freedom to say what they think, than in a lot of other parties and it is not for the Party to answer for every single member on every single occasion -

INTERVIEWER: What about though, if they are speaking at a Reclaim Australia rally?

PRIME MINISTER: I didn't support that at the time.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, but it is a problem.

PRIME MINISTER: He was a backbencher and remains a backbencher in the Government –

INTERVIEWER: And an endorsed candidate I assume.

PRIME MINISTER: By the LNP, but again, do we want to get bogged down in this or do we want to move on to how we actually make things better? In terms of the individuals, I talk to all of my members and as I say, I try and lead by example. My example has been to work with the Muslim community very, very deeply. One of the hardest things I ever did as a politician was when Jamal rang me and there was a family, the El Baf family - I don't know if you remember the story about the four brothers. Jamal rang me when I was Immigration Minister and said; “These four boys have left, we think they have gone to the Middle East to fight for ISIS.” He said; “Is there anything you can do to try and prevent them from getting there?” I immediately got in touch with what was then the Department of Immigration and Border Protection, but sadly had already gone through clearances and they'd already gone through South East Asia. Those boys are all dead today to the best of our knowledge, we know two are dead. But Jamal rang me and said; “I'd like you to come and meet their parents”. So I did and I sat down with them and I was also there with Tony Abbott's knowledge, who was the Prime Minister at the time. I just sat there and listened to their grief. So, I have a keen understanding of what terrorist recruiters can do to destroy families and innocence, again, is the victim. It doesn't matter whether you're Muslim, it doesn't matter you're Christian; when evil comes it robs and it steals.

So I think the answer is not for us to retreat into tribes and try to herd people into tribes and say; “Well, you've got this problem, you've got that problem.” I think the answer is to do what I said before; let's try to better understand where we're all coming from, not try to line people up on teams.

INTERVIEWER: I appreciate that sentiment, I think talking about the past is important because the only way that you can move forward, reset at a moment like this, is if you acknowledge things that have happened in the past that are a problem and that need fixing.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, let me talk about –

INTERVIEWER: No, no, but let me talk about the future -

PRIME MINISTER: You also said Peter was talking about the comment made by the Greens Senator. That comment was suggesting that I and Peter Dutton were responsible for the terrorist attacks in Christchurch. Now, would you find that a reasonable statement to make?

INTERVIEWER: Would I equate it with what Fraser Anning had to say? Would you?

PRIME MINISTER: That I personally –

INTERVIEWER: Did she say literally that you personally were responsible?

PRIME MINISTER: That was the clear implication Waleed.  

INTERVIEWER: The clear implication, okay, we’re going to get into implication –

PRIME MINISTER: I mean –

INTERVIEWER: You’re comparing it to the direct statement of Fraser Anning –

PRIME MINISTER: No sorry, you raised the issue, so let me address it. 

INTERVIEWER: No -  

PRIME MINISTER: Do you think it’s reasonable –

INTERVIEWER: I’m trying to answer your question.

PRIME MINISTER: For any Senator to say that the Prime Minister and the Minister for Home Affairs were responsible for the terrorist attacks in Christchurch?

INTERVIEWER: No, I don’t.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think –

INTERVIEWER: But you’re –

PRIME MINISTER: It’s reasonable that Peter would have found that quite offensive –

INTERVIEWER:  Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: In the heat of the moment when people are upset –

INTERVIEWER: Oh, it was the heat of the moment thing? Is that what you’re saying?

PRIME MINISTER: Waleed, the other night, you were very emotional and I’m sure you may have said some things about me, that based on our conservations since, you think may have been a bit over the top, about my own motives when it comes to these issues.

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, say that again? You think I said what?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, you were on the other night and as we discussed today, you implied that Muslims couldn’t feel safe because they had a Prime Minister who somehow had been prejudiced against them. I don’t believe that’s true.  

INTERVIEWER: Okay, you know what - 

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t think you believe that’s true either.

INTERVIEWER: I don’t, no, and that wasn’t the implication that I was making.

PRIME MINISTER: People say things sometimes –

INTERVIEWER: But since you, Prime Minister, no, let me ask this question. Since you raise it, we’ll come to that report, that shadow cabinet report. You say that this never happened, you’ve called it a smear and a lie. Who is lying?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I can only say anyone who may have talked to a journalist to smear me in that way. Because there have been a number of members who were at that meeting who have gone on the record to support the fact that it did not happen.

INTERVIEWER: Well, there were some members who went on the record, some of whom weren't at the meeting. There are other members who –

PRIME MINISTER: Phillip Ruddock was there and he said it didn't happen.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, no, my understanding - 

PRIME MINISTER: Tony Abbott was there and he said it didn’t happen.

INTERVIEWER: No, no let me explain it.

PRIME MINISTER: David Johnson was there and he said it didn't happen.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister –

PRIME MINISTER: I mean, I was there and I say it didn’t happen.

INTERVIEWER: With respect, Phillip Ruddock did not say it didn’t happen, he said that he could not recall. I have looked high and low -

PRIME MINISTER: Okay –

INTERVIEWER: No, but it’s an important difference isn’t it.

PRIME MINISTER: Well -

INTERVIEWER: You talk about people who have been on the record. Well, there is at least one of those people on the record saying that it did happen, that being Andrew Robb.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no hang on –

INTERVIEWER: You have multiple journalists reporting ‘multiple sources’ –

PRIME MINISTER: Hang on –

INTERVIEWER: Let me finish the question. Let me finish -

PRIME MINISTER: No, I have to stop you there.

INTERVIEWER: You can get to that point in a second. You have multiple journalists -

PRIME MINISTER: No Waleed, you have said that Andrew Robb said something that he did not.

INTERVIEWER: Reporting from - I’ve read it with my own eyes today.

PRIME MINISTER: No. What Andrew –

INTERVIEWER: You have – let me finish this.

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll let you finish, I apologise.

INTERVIEWER: You have multiple reporters, reporting from multiple sources that it happened and you have one on the record saying the same.

PRIME MINISTER: No, that’s not true.

INTERVIEWER: What I am interested in –

PRIME MINISTER: Waleed, that is not true. What is suggested is that I said that we should exploit, exploit concerns about Islam in the community to our political advantage.

INTERVIEWER: Exploit I think is your word. Alright - 

PRIME MINISTER: No, that –

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you this way -

PRIME MINISTER: Andrew Robb –

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you this way -

PRIME MINISTER: Do you mind if I finish?

INTERVIEWER: What did you say?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I’m sorry, Andrew Robb did not say that I did that.

INTERVIEWER: No, Andrew Robb said that you raised the issue.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, I was the shadow immigration minister at the time and I was very concerned about these issues and the way people were feeling in the community.

INTERVIEWER: So when you raised those issues in that meeting, what did you say to them?

PRIME MINISTER: I was concerned that we needed to address them, which is what I've been doing inside and outside of the Parliament for the last 10 years of my life.

INTERVIEWER: Address those concerns?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, to lower them.

INTERVIEWER: So what your argument was in that shadow cabinet meeting was?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I was acknowledging that there were these fears in the community and that we had to address them, not exploit them. To actually seek to try and address them.

INTERVIEWER: So the reports then of other people in the shadow cabinet concluding that discussion by saying; “We have a non-discriminatory immigration policy and that's the way that it should stay”?

PRIME MINISER:  Yes, that has always been my view.

INTERVIEWER: Right, but –

PRIME MINISTER: I have championed that view as a Minister, as a member Parliament for my entire public life –

INTERVIEWER: Why would that need to be said though, if the discussion in the meeting was about; “How can we dampen down community concerns about Muslims”?

PRIME MINISTER: Because I think we have responsibilities - as you were just asking me to do - that where we are concerned that people would have fears about these things, that we would seek to alleviate those fears.

INTERVIEWER: This was a meeting about campaign strategy and you were saying –

PRIME MINISTER: No, this was just a shadow cabinet meeting.

INTERVIEWER: Okay and you –

PRIME MINISTER: Talking about policy.

INTERVIEWER: At the end of that conversation somebody had to say - it was reported as Julie Bishop who I understand was chairing that meeting – said: “We're drawing a line under this because we have a non-discriminatory immigration system.”

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, that's my view and that was my view. It has always been my view.

INTERVIEWER: But I still don’t understand why she would need to say that, if that wasn't a matter of controversy within the meeting? 

PRIME MINISTER: No what I'm saying is that I was concerned about those fears in the community and that it has always been my practice - as I've demonstrated to you outside the Parliament and inside the Parliament - to seek to address those. Why else do you think I would have been working like I have as I explained to you before, why do you think I would be? That's been my experience and that’s why on Saturday after these horrendous attacks, I went to speak to those at the Lakemba Mosque, I was greeted with hugs and tears. Do you think that is the act of someone who hasn't been working closely with the Islamic community in Sydney for a long time?

INTERVIEWER: I'm not accusing you of not having ever worked with the Muslim community in Sydney, or even not having done it for a long time.

PRIME MINISTER: Well can’t you see that what you’re suggesting –

INTERVIEWER: I’m not suggesting –

PRIME MINISTER: Is at complete odds –

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister –

PRIME MINISTER: With the experience –

INTERVIEWER: I’m not suggesting –

PRIME MINISTER: That I’ve been involved in over my last ten years of public life?

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister I’m not suggesting anything. I’m simply -

PRIME MINISTER: Doesn’t it sound odd that that report -

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister I'm asking you a question about a report that is sourced from multiple people, that was reported by multiple journalists, by which all of those journalists stand.

PRIME MINISTER: Two unnamed sources, who have never gone public.

INTERVIEWER: Well, one of them has.

PRIME MINISTER: Well who?

INTERVIEWER: We’ve had this discussion already, I’m asking you –

PRIME MINISTER: No, Andrew Robb is not one of those.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister I’ve asked you to explain it.

PRIME MINISTER: And I have.

INTERVIEWER: You’ve provided your explanation, fine, people will just draw their own conclusions on that. I have no problem with that.

PRIME MINISTER: Waleed let me just say for the record -

INTERVIEWER: Can I come - no, no, I’ve got to ask you this question.

PRIME MINISTER: Well –

INTERVIEWER: You wanted to look forward and you wanted to talk about the tone.

PRIME MINISTER: I want to rule a line under this issue. It never happened, I’ve always been deeply concerned about attitudes towards people of Muslim faith in our community. I entered the Parliament after one of the most horrible scenes that we've seen on our own soil on this issue and set about immediately to try and bring communities together.

INTERVIEWER: Okay.

PRIME MINISTER: I have always acted consistently with that in shadow cabinet, in the Cabinet, by my policy decisions as Minister and in my own personal conduct. So such a report is so at odds with my experience and actions, that I think that speaks for itself.

INTERVIEWER: Does acting in accordance with those beliefs mean that you will be henceforth – this is about the future and about the tone you want to set as a leader - that you will be preferencing One Nation last?

PRIME MINISTER: We are not going to do any preference deals with One Nation.

INTERVIEWER: Not a deal, will you on your how-to-vote cards, be putting One Nation last?

PRIME MINISTER: Those matters are determined by the Party when we know what the nominations are.

INTERVIEWER: You have a very strong voice within that Party.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah and we won't do any deals with One Nation -

INTERVIEWER: I'm not talking about deal with One Nation. I'm talking about a decision from your Party to preference One Nation - who by the way said that Islam was a disease that needed to be vaccinated - will you be putting them last on your how-to-vote card?

PRIME MINISTER: Well what if Fraser Anning is running candidates?

INTERVIEWER: Right. So if Fraser Anning is, you will put One Nation ahead of Fraser Anning?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, you tell me -

INTERVIEWER: I’m just asking.

PRIME MINISTER: Well this is the point Waleed, I don't know who is going to nominate. In the electorate of Longman –

INTERVIEWER: Let me rephrase –

PRIME MINISTER: In the electorate of Longman – no, well you’ve raised the issue –

INTERVIEWER: No, no, no, let me rephrase because I know what you’re going to –

PRIME MINISTER:  Waleed please let me answer one question.

INTERVIEWER: No, because I’ll ask this question -

PRIME MINISTER: Oh okay –

INTERVIEWER: This is going to the point.

PRIME MINISTER: I'm just trying to answer your questions. I was raising the issue –

INTERVIEWER: Let me rephrase it Prime Minister –

PRIME MINISTER: On the practical issue of Longman –

INTERVIEWER: I need to get through this question. Will you at the very least committed in every seat, to putting them below the Labor Party and the Greens?

PRIME MINISTER: I am going to wait to see what all the nominations are and in our Party those decisions are made by the Party organisation. I know the Labor Party wants me to do a preference deal with them. I won't be doing a deal with the Labor Party or the Greens or anyone else.

INTERVIEWER: None of this –

PRIME MINISTER: The election nominations will be called, we will see the candidates and we will make our decisions at that time.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister why are you talking about preference deals? I'm not talking about a preference deal.

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve just answered the question as to how we're going to conduct ourselves in relation to preferences.

INTERVIEWER:  But you’re talking about a preference deal, which is not what I’m talking about.

PRIME MINISTER: No, I said we’re going to make these decisions at the time nominations close and then we'll apply those decisions at that time as a Party organisation.

INTERVIEWER: Do you think, particularly in the circumstances that we face right now, that the Liberal Party and the National Party where relevant, should be preferencing One Nation below Labor and the Greens?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve said we're going to make that decision at the time of the nominations closing.

INTERVIEWER: What do you think?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, you’ll know when we make that decision at that time.

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a view on it?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll be consulting with my own Party organisation, I won't be doing it through your program.

INTERVIEWER: Why is it difficult? Why is it a difficult question?

PRIME MINISTER: Because I'm part of a Party that has a process and that Party listens to a lot of people in it's organisation who are members of our Party. That is a decision that is actually taken in each state and territory division of the Liberal Party, by the President of that Party, as part of their preferences committee on which I will have representatives. That is respecting our process.

INTERVIEWER: But there is also the question of leadership, which you have raised.

PRIME MINISTER: And I’ll be exercising that at that time.

INTERVIEWER: Would it not be a strong act of leadership to say right now that you shouldn't be preferencing in One Nation ahead of Labor and the Greens? It would be an uncontroversial thing.

PRIME MINISTER: No, all I’m saying at this stage is that we will never do a preference deal with One Nation and that we will settle those matters at the time of nominations closing, when we know who all the candidates are.

INTERVIEWER: So does that mean it is possible that you will be preferencing One Nation ahead of Labor and the Greens?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it just means what I just said.

INTERVIEWER: No, it wasn't clear to me on that point, sorry. Does that mean -

PRIME MINISTER: We will make those decisions –

INTERVIEWER: You will, it’s possible?

PRIME MINISTER: Clear at the time of the nominations closing, Waleed.

INTERVIEWER: Okay on the question of immigration - and here I’m not talking about the policy of immigration so much as the rhetoric of immigration, the discourse around immigration - do you think it's a problem when we talk about asylum seekers in particular through the prism of the possibility of them being rapists, of being murderers, of being paedophiles? This kind of ‘quasi Trumpian’ language? In his case applied to Mexicans.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's only relevant if in the cases that we're talking about, that’s what is known about the actual individuals who may be subject to transfers. That was the topic of that debate at the time and that's what was said.

INTERVIEWER: Right.

PRIME MINISTER: Should we ignore the fact that if there are persons who do have those records, or for whom those issues are present, that we should ignore that?

INTERVIEWER: The question –

PRIME MINISTER: Like it's taboo, you’re not allowed to mention it?

INTERVIEWER: No, no there are multiple points to this, one of which is that it was warning that these people would be in Australia, as though they would be in the community. The bill in question never did that. I suppose it's about whether –

PRIME MINISTER: Well no, the bill actually could do that, if they were put in community detention in metropolitan parts of the city, that’s exactly –

INTERVIEWER: The bill made clear that they could be denied on those grounds and so they wouldn't get they into the country in the first place.

PRIME MINISTER:  No I'm sorry Waleed, the bill didn't do that. The bill didn't do that. So for those for whom that is a particular issue, and there is intelligence or information that relates to those individuals who have that as an issue for us, well of course we're going to take the necessary precautions.

INTERVIEWER: We spoke to numerous people who were involved in drafting the bill, there seems to have been no advice that those people, with those track records, would be able to –

PRIME MINISTER: Well sorry, we are the Government and we have to implement it. We know that's exactly what can happen and we can't resist it.

INTERVIEWER: Right, so do you understand though that –

PRIME MINISTER: We're implementing that bill right now, it's not ours.

INTERVIEWER: I understand. Do you understand –

PRIME MINISTER: We are taking the advice on how it has to be implemented and we'll be doing that.

INTERVIEWER: Do you understand though that when you frame the issue in that way, that creates an environment of prejudice? Or do you think that's not what happens?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I think we're not going to sugar-coat to the public the implications of laws passing the Parliament and Waleed, it's important that you don't either.

INTERVIEWER: No, I’m not in the process of doing anything of the sort.

PRIME MINISTER: In your commentary on these things, all journalists I think, have to be careful that they don't create a false impression of the risks that need to be managed.

INTERVIEWER: I am asking you a question about whether or not describing people, Prime Minister –

PRIME MINISTER: The only people are described like that, are people that you could make that description of.

INTERVIEWER: I feel like it’s very difficult to get through a sentence at the moment. The question really is about whether or not front-footing that description of these people, when there are so few of them in that category - and the categories that we were being warned about ended up being so vanishingly small once further questioning was applied to them – that that creates -

PRIME MINISTER: Well actually we’re talking about a number. 

INTERVIEWER: That that creates a prejudice.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no Waleed, you've got to be honest with people. If a bill that was put forward and supported by the Labor Party, was going to be creating risks for managing the transfer of people into the community, then I'm not going to tell the Australian people what those risks don't exist. I'm not going to sugar-coat it. There are real risks, there are very real risks. I mean people used to accuse me of this when I was talking about what we needed to do to actually get our borders under control. They used to accuse me of all sorts of motives. But I was right, it needed –

INTERVIEWER: And how many people were in this category?

PRIME MINISTER: My last advice on all of those of whom there were some serious concerns on character issues, I think was over about 50.

INTERVIEWER: No, 50 murderers, rapists and paedophiles?

PRIME MINISTER: Not only those but also people who had serious character assessments –

INTERVIEWER: No, no how many, how many murderers, rapists and paedophiles are we talking about?

PRIME MINISTER: They were actually published –

INTERVIEWER: How many?

PRIME MINISTER: We had people with character concerns, over 50 people Waleed –

INTERVIEWER: No, no that’s not what I asked. How many murders, rapists and paedophiles? It’s an important question because that's –

PRIME MINISTER: They were among those 50, that’s true.

INTERVIEWER: Among? Two among? Three among? 50 among?

PRIME MINISTER: So how many rapists – no, let me put this to you Waleed. How rapists and murderers should be transferred to the Australian community?

INTERVIEWER: I would say none, which is what the authors of the bill contend.

PRIME MINISTER: And they were wrong, they were wrong Waleed.

INTERVIEWER: No, no but let me ask you the question. Because as you say –

PRIME MINISTER: There only needs to be one Waleed, that’s my answer.

INTERVIEWER: And if the Minister has discretion to stop that person?  

PRIME MINISTER: But they don’t.

INTERVIEWER: They do.

PRIME MINISTER: They do not Waleed. I’m sorry, I’m the Prime Minister, I’m responsible for implementing it and I have the full availability of the Attorney General, the Attorney General’s Department, the Department of Home Affairs and their advice to me is, no, we don't have that power. So I don't know whose advice you're relying on, but I'm sorry, you don't know.

INTERVIEWER: So because of that one person. Is it one by the way?

PRIME MINISTER: No it's more than one, it's well over that –

INTERVIEWER: Okay can you give me that number, I am actually interested to know it.

PRIME MINISTER: I've already told you there's, there's almost 60 actually who were identified as having serious character concerns, that in other circumstances we would never allow to be transferred to Australia. So that's enough –

INTERVIEWER: You know that’s not the question I’ve asked.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I’ve asked you the same question and you’re saying ‘no rapists’.

INTERVIEWER: There were reports about murderers, rapists and paedophiles.

PRIME MINISTER: They exist and they are there –

INTERVIEWER: How many? How many of those 60?

PRIME MINISTER:  And those crimes have been committed actually in Papua New Guinea.

INTERVIEWER: How many of those 60?

PRIME MINISTER: There are a number, I don't have the numbers to hand, but this is getting into a semantic discussion. What I'm saying to you Waleed is this though; don't sugar-coat this stuff.

INTERVIEWER: I’m not.

PRIME MINISTER: It doesn't excuse it.

INTERVIEWER: I have no interest in sugar-coating any of it.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm afraid mate, sometimes you could be accused of it.

INTERVIEWER: Yes? Is that what you’re doing now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well you're saying that there was no risk Waleed.

INTERVIEWER: I'm asking you, no –

PRIME MINISTER: And there was there was risk and you say it didn't exist because the bill didn't allow for it. I'm telling you that's wrong.

INTERVIEWER: I'm saying the bill protected against that risk.

PRIME MINISTER: So I was always trying to be honest with the Australian people about the risk.

INTERVIEWER:  And I’m not sugar-coating anything with that. Let me ask you about one final area here. What needs to happen now communally, from the Government? What does the Government need to do, what leadership does the Government need to show to lower the social temperature in Australia, do you think?

PRIME MINISTER: You mean particularly after Friday?

INTERVIEWER: Yeah.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, exactly what I did do. The first step, call this out for what it was. Next step, go and sit down with Muslim brothers and sisters that I know and express my deepest and serious condolences and talk about the issues we needed to manage straight away. On Sunday, I went to the Coptic Church in Arncliffe in Sydney, a community no stranger to shootings in churches, who understand probably more than most how deeply these things can affect communities. I went there and spoke there, prayed there with my family. On Monday, I went to the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce here in Melbourne and I gave a speech which talked about the need for Australians to see each other as individuals, hot herded into particular groups. That we could actually respect each other and the motives that sit behind each and every individual and not make assumptions about people based on what other people have said. That we need to disagree better, not necessarily agree more. That we didn't allow conflict in debate to become more sport than an entertainment, but that we were able to get behind that and actually have real community-building initiatives which are exactly the type of initiatives I announced on Wednesday of this week.

INTERVIEWER: So, I fully –

PRIME MINISTER: Initiative Together for Humanity, which we put $2.5 million in, initiatives like the one we announced today with Bachar Houli down there at Richmond at Punt Road. These types of programs which I've been supporting and my Government has been funding for years now. That's what we need to do.

INTERVIEWER: So I fully expect that when someone, one of your political opponents behaves in a way that is contrary to the spirit of that, that you will censure them. I fully expect that. Do you think you will do it when it comes from within your own set of political allies?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I have. So again Waleed, look to the experience that I've laid out for you tonight and don't prejudge me.

INTERVIEWER: I’m not prejudging, I’m asking the question. Will you henceforth -

PRIME MINISTER: That's my form Waleed.

INTERVIEWER: So next time –

PRIME MINISTER: I'm happy to call out people, as others have sought to call me out on things, I'm not shy about doing these sorts of things. I'm not shy about doing these sorts of things because I know what my values are and I know what I have done in my life, to try and build these bridges between communities.

When I became Prime Minister I said I want to do three things; I wanted to keep the economy strong - because if you don't have a job you don't have a lot of choices. If the economy is not strong you can't pay for service like hospitals and schools.

I said I want to keep Australians safe - and that wasn't just about strong borders and our Defence forces, it was about the biggest ever plan for countering domestic violence in Australia's history, at $328 million which we announced just the other week.

And I said I wanted to bring Australians together. Now I have form on all these things Waleed and I'm bringing Australians together. I think you'll find it hard to find another member of Parliament who has not made at least the same effort that I have to build these bridges between these communities.

I continue to do that as Prime Minister each and every day because you know, we've got to love all Australians. It doesn't matter what their background is, it doesn't matter what their religion is, it doesn't matter what their ethnicity is. We are the most successful multicultural country on the earth, the best immigration nation of any country on the earth. That's my responsibility to make sure it stays that way and that's my absolute commitment.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister I wish you all the best with that endeavour.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I look forward to your support and we will be doing it.

INTERVIEWER: We’ll certainly be watching and supporting, absolutely where that does happen.

PRIME MINISTER: Cheers.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much for your time.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, good morning, welcome.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning.

INTERVIEWER: Now, you have said it’s your job to have a plan for managing our population, we agree with you. So will you be successful in directing migrants to regional areas? And what support in these regional areas once migrants get out there?

PRIME MINISTER: Well you’re, Australia does need a plan for population growth management, that’s one of the things I said when I became Prime Minister and that’s what we’re releasing today. The way we are encouraging people to go into the regions is through a number of points. First of all, for students going into the regions, they will get an extra years work right should they study in a regional area. So that’s population going into regions that can actually support regional economies. We should also be clear here that the regions we're talking about are out of the big cities, so it includes Adelaide, it includes Darwin, it includes places like Newcastle. So we’re talking about other urban areas, we're not talking about outback towns, but where there are opportunities in those places, of course that is encouraged.

The skills test, the skills points test, you will get extra points for going out into the regions as well. There are more occupations listed under our skills program in these areas than there are in the big cities, so it is very much an encouragement program and incentive program. And at the end of the day, if you're looking for permanent residence and you have a visa that has you in a regional area out of the big cities, then obviously, if you come and live in the big city, then you won't get a permanent visa. So there is very a big incentive to stay with the program there.

But when people get jobs in these areas, and we only talking about people going into places where there is the jobs, where there is the services and opportunities, where we have got a lot of shires and councils around the country saying to us, “we want people”. I was in Adelaide yesterday with Premier Marshall, he’s saying we want more people, so this facilitates that.

INTERVIEWER: Now the Opposition has questioned the timing of this immigration announcement, given what we’ve seen in Christchurch. Does that wash with you?

PRIME MINISTER: No it doesn’t. I think it’s disappointing. I made it very, very clear - this is about managing population, it’s about infrastructure investments, it is about congestion busting on our roads, it’s about actually having social cohesion programs which I’m announcing today, which is about bringing more Australians together. It is a plan to work with the states and territories. They will get an increased say about the intakes in their states and territories from less than a fifth to more than a quarter. It’s about managing our population growth and I think to conflate it with other issues is very disappointing. I can understand why Labor would be sensitive about this given Mr Daley's comments in New South Wales, I found those comments about Asian immigrants to be very upsetting and offensive and I think Mr Shorten should disassociate himself from those comments.

INTERVIEWER: OK, now sweeping changes to the welfare system are also going to be announced today. Job hunters are going to be allowed to search for work on their home computer or smartphone, there is a new app coming. How will that help jobseekers?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’ve already had more than 1.25 million jobs created since we were first elected and one of the reasons we’ve been able to do that is through these services. We’re increasing greater flexibility into jobactive to mean that we still have clear rules and clear standards. But the plans will be more targeted to those individuals, it’ll be different in rural areas where there may be different opportunities in city areas. So it’s a more flexible plan giving people more tools, both helping those people find jobs and those people looking for jobs. But our economic plan is creating jobs. Another 1.25 million jobs over the next five years and that’s on top of the 1.25 million since we came to government.

INTERVIEWER: You have appealed to world leaders to crack down on social media platforms following the Christchurch Mosque attack. What you want them to do?

PRIME MINISTER: I want the social media companies to use their technology to ensure that instantaneously, their platforms cannot be used as weapons by terrorists. If they can geotarget an ad to you based on something you’ve looked at on Facebook within half a second - it is almost like they are reading your mind - then I'm sure they have the technological capability to write algorithms that screen out this type of violent and hideous material at a moment’s notice. They built these things, so they should have the technology to make them safe and we need to act in concert with other countries.

I was speaking to Jacinda Ardern about this last night, I will be seeking to speak to others. There was a meeting up in Japan yesterday that we participated in and I welcome the support that we are getting the support from other countries there. I think there will be a groundswell on this and as we go forward to the next G20 meeting, if we can act together as we have to make sure they pay their taxes, I think we can make sure we can act together to ensure that they keep our citizens safe. These tools are good, they can be very positive, connecting families - I don't want to touch any of that, I just want to make sure that these platforms cannot be weaponised by terrorists to spread their hate and their violence.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah let’s hope they’re listening and they start using it for good and not for evil. Prime Minister, we have to leave it there, thanks for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks guys, good to talk to talk to you.

INTERVIEWER: What's your advice today though, Prime Minister, to those thousands of Australians who are planning to go to or may already have booked to go to Gallipoli next month for ANZAC Day?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think there's a common-sense response to that, to be mindful of the nature of these comments and to await further advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. But I think people should exercise common sense in relation to their travel plans.

INTERVIEWER: Are you concerned that these comments by the President expose or open Australia to terror attacks?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I believe that how we respond to this - which is, frankly, in sorrow, in disappointment - is the appropriate response, and to appeal to the goodwill of the relationship that has existed for a very long time and to see that put back on its appropriate footings. I don't intend to sort of engage in that cycle I referred to, to ensure that we can keep Australians and Turks safe.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, you have a deep connection we know to the ANZAC story. Can you give us a sense of your immediate reaction when you heard these remarks from President Erdogan?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I was just deeply offended, as any Australian would be. The first thing that came to my mind was the promise of Ataturk. I mean, Ataturk sought to transform his country into a modern nation, an embracing nation, and I think these comments are at odds with that spirit and the promise that was made to Australians, that we have relied upon, I think, to build the good relationship that we have.

INTERVIEWER: What do you mean by ‘common sense’? Are you suggesting that Australians put their travel plans on hold?

PRIME MINISTER: I think they should exercise caution and await further official advice.

INTERVIEWER: Could you expand, please, on your comment that all options are open?

PRIME MINISTER: Only to say that all options are open.

INTERVIEWER: Is it an apology that you're demanding from Erdogan?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm seeking a response in the good faith of our relationship.

INTERVIEWER: What was the ambassador's explanation for the President's comment?

PRIME MINISTER: The excuses I don't accept are that things get said in the heat of the moment. The excuses that I don't accept are that things are said in an electoral context. I expect, in our relationships with our friends, that we always act in the good faith of that relationship. There is an opportunity, I think, for that to now take place. I will extend the time to do that. I should also note that I've spoken with the Leader of the Opposition and he endorses this approach that I am taking and we appreciate that. I am also keen to ensure that we continue to liaise very closely with New Zealand on this.

INTERVIEWER: Can I ask Prime Minister, have you seen the vision? Because they seemed to be very warmly received, these comments. People cheered, the crowd applauded, they chanted. What do you make of that? He's obviously playing to a certain section of his community and his electorate in his campaign events.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I choose to have faith in the tremendous relationship between the Australian and Turkish people, which has been experienced by Australians as they've travelled with Kiwis to Gallipoli for many, many, many years and the experience, the hospitality and goodwill of the Turkish people. I choose to believe in the good faith and great citizenship of Turkish Australians in this country. The Gallipoli mosque, as it's known, in Auburn, and as a result, that's what I choose to have faith in. As you know me, I always am the optimist. I always will seek to act in good faith and I simply would hope that others would do the same. Thank you very much.

SABRA LANE: The Federal Government is unveiling a population policy today. It will cap the nation's permanent migration intake at 160,000 people for the next four years. That's about the level it's at now. It's a reduction of 30,000 places. It's also introducing a new skilled worker visa covering 23,000 migrants. But it will require them to live in regional areas of the nation for a minimum of three years as a condition for them securing permanent residency. It's also promising better fast rail links to some regional cities to help relieve congestion. The Prime Minister Scott Morrison joined me a short time ago, but we began with questions about the New Zealand investigation. Prime Minister thanks for joining AM.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you Sabra.

LANE: How would you quantify the threat of right wing extremists in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: I think it's serious and I think it always has been and that's why at the federal level our agencies have always taken it seriously. And the work that they've done over a long period of time I think has greatly assisted us, particularly in recent days when we've been responding to the issue, the terrible tragedy in Christchurch, the terrorist attack, to ensure that we're well prepared for the response that was needed here.

LANE: The New Zealand minister over there Andrew Little says that authorities there were only really alert to this midway through last year. What assurances can you give Australians here that their investigations are on point?

PRIME MINISTER: The Australian investigations picked up immediately and we've been assisting not only directly with the inquiries in New Zealand but also providing assistance and coordinating that investigation linking up with other countries around the world. When it comes to our knowledge of white supremacists or separatists or other extreme groups like this, we have got quite a bit of intelligence in these areas and it goes back quite a way on these groups. So we'll continue to act on that and that is very much informing our participation.

LANE: Where would you suggest voters in the upcoming federal election put One Nation and the Shooters Party?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we're not having any preference deals with One Nation, we’re not having any preference deals with the Greens or Labor for that matter. You know, when the nominations are all set that's when our preferences are determined.

LANE:  Yeah. Will you instruct your organisation to put them somewhere?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we'll wait for who is on the list of every candidate all around the country. I mean, as we've seen in the past, there can be some individuals who present very, very extreme views even beyond those of some of those you've mentioned. So I mean, we'll wait to see what all the nominations are and that's our normal process. It was at the last election that Labor did a preference deal with One Nation. I recall it. The Member for Dobell was elected on the basis of it.

LANE: Is a censure strong enough for Fraser ending in Parliament? Some want him suspended for the rest of the term.

PRIME MINISTER: Well look, the suspension is a matter that the Senators will consider. I understand that's being discussed, but in terms of a motion that is currently being moved by the Government with the support of the opposition I think is highly appropriate. But I think he should face the full force of the law, personally, and that is what I expect state and territory police authorities to be looking at.

LANE: In regards to assault, or in regards to hate speech?

PRIME MINISTER: I think there are a range of avenues open there and I'd expect people to be applying the law.

LANE: Onto your announcement today, this intention has been flagged for a long time. The rate that you want is one that Australia is currently close to. Is this confirmation of something already happening?

PRIME MINISTER: What today is is about a comprehensive plan for Australia's future population growth. I want to see Australians getting home safer and earlier to spend time with their families. I want to see tradies being able to get on site, not sit in traffic jams. And that means you need a balanced, responsible migration settings but it also means taking opportunities outside the big cities. Whether that's in Adelaide or Darwin or in regional locations like Newcastle or places like that, it's about seizing the opportunities where they present and relieving the congestion burden where it's really impacting on quality of living. And so that's what the plan is designed to do and that means busting congestion with the infrastructure investments we've made, planning for future population growth together with the states and territories to take on a much bigger role, moving from determining less than a fifth of the total intake to more than a quarter. And then of course continuing to bring Australians together and working on the social cohesion, the social fabric which provides the very opportunity for continued prosperity and Australians living well together.

LANE: The Chamber of Commerce and Industry's James Pearson has described this shift as an economic own goal. He says it's very disappointing that you're imposing a lower cap. How do you respond?

PRIME MINISTER: I think once James has the opportunity to actually read the policy I think he will react in a more measured way -

LANE: I've spoken to him personally this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: He's entitled to his view but I think what Australians need and our economy needs is a balanced and responsible migration plan. I mean, under this plan we're seeing increased places for employer nominated skilled visas. Under this plan we're seeing opportunities for more regional visas where there are some more than 40,000 job vacancies in regional Australia. So this is about ensuring that our migration plan is tied towards where the opportunities are and relieving the congestion which can slow economic growth. I mean, a tradie isn't getting paid when they're sitting in a traffic jam. They get paid when they get on site.

LANE: Sure.

PRIME MINISTER: And his members who are tradies will want to get on site and have a good migration plan that helps them do that and infrastructure to back it up.

LANE: This announcement comes three days out from a crucial state election where population growth and congestion are very big issues there and where the incumbent Liberal Party is in trouble. What's the public to make of this timing?

PRIME MINISTER: That this is an important plan that we've been working on from the day that I became Prime Minister. I took these matters to COAG last December. This has been the product of an enormous amount of work. And I said that it needed to be finalized before we handed down the Budget because the migration settings, as handed down in the Budget Sabra which as you know is in less than a fortnight. I think the issues that relate to this matter in the New South Wales election are the outrageous comments by Mr Daley. I mean, Mr Daley has basically said that Asians take Australian jobs and I've just find that abhorrent with all the talk about these issues lately. I mean, I denounced those comments and I think Bill Shorten should do the same.

LANE: What is the economic… where is the economic modelling and what are the economic benefits of your announcement, given that migration is a very strong economic stimulus?

PRIME MINISTER: Well the fiscal impacts of this plan are no impact, it has no impact on the Budget and that's what we've been working through and that's why it is, I think, a very responsible level of intake. There are others who would have liked to have seen lower levels of intake. I don't share those views. This level of intake I think is the one that continues to support the important employer nominated skill stream. 70 per cent of our intake under this plan is skilled and that's the program which helps drive the economy forward. So this is a positive plan for the economy. There is nothing to suggest that this would do anything other than support our current growth levels in the economy, whilst avoiding the serious congestion problems which can slow our economy down.

LANE: 23,000 migrants will be required to live in regional areas under this plan. How will you force them to do that and will there be jobs for them?

PRIME MINISTER: No, look that is a misrepresentation of the plan. What it is is the opportunity for 23 classes for skilled migrants to settle and remain in regional Australia. No one's being forced anywhere. This is an opportunity for people and we're talking about places outside the big cities. So that includes Adelaide, it includes Darwin.

LANE: Sure but how you can you can't compel them to live in those places.

PRIME MINISTER: Well what the visas will do will say that if you have complied with the terms of the visa to live in a regional area, then you will be able to apply for permanent residency. Now this is what is very important at the end of the day, if you comply with the arrangements particularly for the issues around where student visas where there will be extra incentives for students to go and study in regional areas, which will be very good for regional economies, then the ticket to permanent residency will mean being able to have maintain your provisional requirements of your visa to live in those areas. Now, that that is a very big incentive. When people come to Australia on those visas and there is a requirement for them to be in particular places, and it can be all over the country. It's not in one particular area. And if there are no jobs in those places, they won't go there. They will go where there are jobs and where places and cities are looking for them to come. I mean, Adelaide, Arana, Kalgoorlie, Darwin, Warrnambool - all of these places have been telling us that they actually want to see more people and there'll be opportunities for them to go there and where they take up those visas, whether they're state sponsored or whether they're under the new visa forms we're announcing today, then that will provide them with a better pathway towards permanent residence. So it's done through incentive, that's where it's done.

LANE: All right. Prime Minister we're out of time. Thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Sabra.

INTERVIEWER: We're joined from Canberra by the Prime Minister Scott Morrison. Prime Minister good morning. 

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Michael.

INTERVIEWER: The current intake is not much above 160,000, that’s the new cap you're announcing. So what difference will this make?

PRIME MINISTER: Well this is a responsible plan to manage our future population growth. It's not only about the change to the cap as you say, coming from 190,000 down to 160,000. It's about the congestion-busting infrastructure and other major projects we're putting around the country. It’s about the plan that we’ve got in a framework with the states and territories, who will have a bigger say about the intake into their states and territories. That comes out of the COAG meeting I took these plan to last December. Of course, it's about achieving greater cohesion, bringing Australians together wherever we are in Australia, investing in more of those social cohesion programs that support migrants in our community, to be successful.

INTERVIEWER: The economic benefits of migration are unquestioned as you know.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

INTERVIEWER: We do know, as you also know, that the economy is slowing, so won't this hurt the economy down the track?

PRIME MINISTER: No it won't because it's a responsible cap. The employer-nominated positions under the plan will be maintained. The skills and occupation list particularly for regional areas, will remain at their expanded levels to ensure that they can get the skills they need and the places they need them. It's also about ensuring Michael, that the congestion that occurs in our major cities - that can be a sheet anchor on growth as well, a tradie doesn't get paid for sitting at a traffic jam, he or she doesn't build anything when they're sitting there, it happens when they get on site - so it's important that we manage the quality of life and the liveability of our cities.

The Productivity Commission, I tasked as Treasurer to tell me what the big productivity challenges were going forward. The management of our cities and population was a key one of those. That’s why we’re acting on this and I began that process after becoming Prime Minister.

INTERVIEWER: But equally Prime Minister how much of this congestion is due not so much to migration, but state governments of both stripes, not thinking strategically and thinking ahead, building your roads, building your rail lines many, many years ago?

PRIME MINISTER: This is why our plan does address those issues, Michael. It's not just about the migration settings. They're responsibly settings, but equally it is about those other points I mentioned; the congestion-busting infrastructure in our congestion-busing fund, dealing with some of those specific road projects that need attention. I was at Fullerton Road just yesterday in Adelaide, there’s 60,000 cars that go down there, it needs to be widened. We're going to invest in that project with the South Australian Government and there’s countless others of these projects around the country. It's about a planning framework with the states and territories to ensure that we are lining up infrastructure spending with how we're managing migration. It's also about making sure Australians come together and we can live together. We are the most successful immigrant country on earth. Michael Daley from New South Wales doesn't seem to agree with me on that, he's made rather appalling comments regarding the contribution of Asian migrants to this country. I completely reject those comments and I think Bill Shorten should disassociate himself as well.

ROWALD: A few other issues before you leave Prime Minister. The Turkish President Erdogan overnight, visiting Gallipoli, and speaking of the Christchurch attacker said, and I’m quoting him directly regarding the many Australian who visit Gallipoli each year: “Your grandparents came, some of them returned in coffins. Have no doubt we will send you back like your grandparents." What do you make of that comment?

PRIME MINISTER: I find it a very offensive comment, of course I do. I will be calling in the Turkish Ambassador today to meet with me and discuss these issues. I have denounced, Australia has denounced, New Zealand has denounced, absolutely and completely, the act of extremist right-wing terrorism, white supremacist terrorism that we saw in New Zealand. We could not have been more forward-leaning in offering our great condolences and support to the Muslim community, both in New Zealand and Australia. I find the responsibility in these situations, I think of all leaders, is to take the temperature down on these issues. I don't intend to seek to escalate that in the response I'm giving today. So I’m going to be speaking directly to the Turkish Ambassador about this.

We've had a tremendous relationship with the Turkish people over a long period of time. We've seen that in the spirit in which Anzac Day has been able to be commemorated each and every year. So I don't find these comments very helpful, I don’t find them very accurate or truthful as well, because the actions of the Australia and New Zealand Government have been consistent with our values of welcoming and supporting people from all around the world. We are the most successful migrant countries and particularly Australia, on the planet today. We are an example to the rest of the world about how we can all live together in peace and harmony. I think Australia and New Zealand has a lot to offer the rest of the world and perhaps, they should be looking more closely at the example we set.

INTERVIEWER: I also want to give you the opportunity on national TV to clear up a controversy that has been swirling in the past few days. Do you Scott Morrison, in a shadow cabinet meeting back in 2010, did you urge the Coalition to capitalise on anti-Muslim sentiment for political purposes?

PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely not, it is a disgraceful smear and an appalling lie.

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever in any shadow cabinet or Cabinet meeting raised that thought.

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: Your office has threatened to sue the Ten Network which raised this allegation on Thursday, for defamation. Will you proceed with that?

PRIME MINISTER: I have no intention of doing that, I just simply want people to report the truth and that is an ugly and disgusting lie. I reject it absolutely.

Over the last decade Michael, I have spent my time as a public figure working with the Muslim community in south western New South Wales. I have walked the Kokoda Track with my Muslim brothers and sisters, I’ve done it on the Sandakan Death March. I have done it on the Salamaua Track in Papua New Guinea and organised, together with my good friend Jason Clare, similar visits to Turkey for the centenary of ANZAC. That’s why I’m welcomed when I attend mosques in south western Sydney, with warm embraces. Perhaps if people focused a bit more on the story they don’t want to tell about my relationship with people of all faiths in this community, then perhaps they wouldn’t leap to make prejudiced conclusions.

INTERVIEWER: Okay Prime Minister, just before we go, you speak a lot of boosting harmony, which a lot of people would agree with. In that vein, will the Liberal Party put One Nation last on it’s how-to-vote cards in the election?

PRIME MINISTER: We won't be doing any preference deals with One Nation. I do notice that the Labor Party did at the last election. I’m not going to take lectures from the Labor Party who had -

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister you mention no preference deals, but the –

PRIME MINISTER: I haven’t finished Michael.

INTERVIEWER: The question was, will you put the –

PRIME MINISTER: Michael do you mind if I finish my answer? At the last election, the Labor Party did a preference deal with One Nation that saw people like the Member for Dobell elected into the Parliament. So we will wait until nominations close and then as is always the case, we will set our preferences on the full range of tickets. Because we don't know who some of the nominees are going to be. What if Fraser Anning runs candidates all around the country? So we're not going to prejudice that, we’ll go through the normal process. I won't be doing any preference deals, that's the same policy that we've had for years, there’s no change to that position. There hasn’t been -

INTERVIEWER: But you can't guarantee you will put One Nation last. Not -

PRIME MINISTER: I know that's what the Labor Party wants you to ask me Michael –

INTERVIEWER: It’s - Prime Minister, the Labor Party hasn’t asked me to ask anything, I’m - 

PRIME MINISTER: They’ve been putting it around the entire gallery for the last three days Michael and I think it's quite appalling that the Labor Party would be putting this about, when they themselves were the ones who did deals in the Senate with One Nation, at the last election. So I'm not going to buy into it.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister Scott Morrison thank you so much for joining us on News Breakfast.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks, great to be here.

INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister is on the line, Prime Minister good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Alan.

INTERVIEWER: Firstly PM, Erdogan, the Turkish President. Do you have a comment on that?

PRIME MINISTER: I do. First of all I'll be calling in the Turkish Ambassador today to make my remarks directly to him. But I find the comments obviously, offensive. Deeply offensive. But also I think very unhelpful because Australia and New Zealand, we have both absolutely, unconditionally condemned the terrorist attack in Christchurch. We have reached out and provided every support to the Muslim community both here in Australia and in New Zealand. Australia and New Zealand are models of tolerant societies for people from all around the world.

Now I find President Erdogan’s comments very much at odds with what Ataturk said -

INTERVIEWER: Correct.

PRIME MINISTER: That our son’s could lie safely on their shores and rest in peace there. I find it a violation of that as well. So this is all - you know I think it's our job here Allan, not to escalate this.

INTERVIEWER: True.

PRIME MINISTER: It is our job to take the temperature down, that's what tolerant societies do. I find the comments very regrettable and unhelpful. Perhaps, he's a member of the G20, I hope he will join with me in addressing issues around social media when it comes to terrorist attacks. Because social media platforms have been weaponized by terrorists of all influences around the world. Hopefully he can join in constructive initiatives working together with ourselves and New Zealand on that.

INTERVIEWER: Okay. To come back to this immigration thing, 160,000. Many people would say Prime Minister that that’s about where it is at the moment. Do you think – right, 160 so you're not really making too much of a change at all and the fact that you say it won’t alter any kind of Budget appropriations indicates that it’s already there. But do you think the people of Sydney in particular and Melbourne will feel any difference in terms of what you're saying today? And if so when?

PRIME MINISTER: Well they'll start feeling that in terms of how the intake is done from 1 July this year. Because it's not only what the overall number is - which is the cap of 160,000 - but it's about where people are being encouraged to go. So this is about ensuring that there is less pressure on big cities like Sydney and Melbourne, where there are real population pressures which are frustrating people getting home on time and safely, to be with the kids, help with homework, as well as tradies being able to get on site. You don't get for paid sitting in a traffic jam. So, it’s about encouraging people to go out outside the big cities. So that includes Adelaide, it includes Darwin, it includes Newcastle

INTERVIEWER: How do you get them to stay there?

PRIME MINISTER: Well the points test will give them incentives if they want permanent residence to remain in these locations. Everyone who comes on a provisional visa, they want the permanent residence. To get the permanent residence, you'll have to comply with the terms of your visa. But equally the states and territories will be given more places under the current program. They'll go from less than a fifth, to more than a quarter. That will give them a greater say about how many more people are coming into the states and territories.

So I think this is a very balanced plan Alan. It is one that deals with infrastructure which is the real issue that needs to be addressed. You've talked about things like fast rail, but the congestion-busting road projects we're putting right across the country, the road investments we're making out around Western Sydney International Nancy-Bird Walton Airport, all of these programs are designed to try and relieve the burden on our big cities, while realising the opportunities outside our big cities.

INTERVIEWER: Okay. Just to use language that people can understand, the number of permanent residents is what you're talking about here. So all the Department of Home Affairs has to do, is to reduce the number of permanent resident stamps. That's fine and you're talking 160,000 and it's very easy to understand. But wouldn't you concede that many of the future permanent residents are already here? I mean some of them are partners of citizens. Some of them are partners of permanent residents. They have a right to permanent residence, it’s just a matter of when. So is the permanent intake the one that counts? Because there are many people here who will increase the population as a result of the fact that they here and will be able to secure permanent residence and they aren’t part of the 160,000?

PRIME MINISTER: Ultimately, to have a permanent visa, they would have to be in the 160,000, that includes family visas and those visas – which are about 45 or 47 odd thousand a year at the moment. There is no change to that, that will continue. But 70 per cent of the migration program will continue to be on skills. This is a very important issue, having skills be the dominant form of migration to the country, that's what actually grows the economy.

I remember back when John Howard came into power, after Paul Keating, the percentage of that migration program that was skilled was round about 30 per cent. 30 per cent and now we've got it up to 70 percent.

INTERVIEWER: 70 per cent, right.

PRIME MINISTER: That is very important. It's really adding value and because migration does, migrants have added value, of course, to our country. So I'm disappointed with the comments of Michael Daly in New South Wales.

INTERVIEWER: Oh forget him, forget him.

PRIME MINISTER: They were appalling comments on the contribution of Asian immigrants to Australia. Bill Shorten should denounce it.

INTERVIEWER: He's no worry to you. Just tomorrow though, are you going to be undermined in a way because - unless you've got a bit of an insight, I'm sure as Prime Minister you most probably have - because these net overseas migration figures come out tomorrow. It'll count everyone who is here for 12 months out of the last 16, net overseas migration. It's been running at massively high levels of over 200,000 net overseas migration figures. What happens if tomorrows figures are even higher?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it would only reinforce the need for the plan that we've announced today. But you're right to say that temporary migration has had a very big impact on the level of population growth. And I've been making I've been making that point for a long time. I mean, if you think about a bus and there's 10 extra people on the bus, well four extra people on the bus coming in a year were born here about - just under that actually - a bit over four have come as temporary migrants who seek to move to permanent residence, and the balance two are permanent migrants. So that's basically how the inflow of population works.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah but I mean, you've got 500,000 international students, 500,000 international students. My God.

PRIME MINISTER: And let me say in this plan we've announced today we're providing incentives for those students to actually go and study in regional areas by giving them an additional a year of work rights.

INTERVIEWER: But supposing they get the permanent residency, supposing they get... just half of them get permanent residency.

PRIME MINISTER: I know but Alan that has to come in them as 160,000 cap. That's how these two things work together. So the issue if you think about, it the impact of what our international student industry and our tourist industry obviously is massively important for our economy it creates a lot of regional jobs. So you've got more of those students who are coming in choosing to study in regional areas or places like Adelaide or Darwin and things like that. That is going to support those economies and it's going to remove congestion pressure off Sydney and off Melbourne. So the real design of this plan is to focus not just on what the total level of intake is but where people are encouraged to go.

INTERVIEWER: OK good. I won't talk to you today about the infrastructure because that's part of where they will go to settle. You talk about Melbourne to Shepparton and Sydney to Newcastle and so on…

PRIME MINISTER: We'll have more to say about that.

INTERVIEWER: Quite. But could I just say on that, the notion that we want to get people out of the capital cities, a most laudable notion. The elephant in the room, Prime Minister, surely is water. If you harvested water, if you built dams, if you moved water to regional Australia you could increase productivity dramatically and not only would there be a capacity to live in the regions, people would be happy to live there and you increase the productive quotient in Australia. So in infrastructure, when are you going to harvest the water, move the water and build some dams?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we're building one at Hughenden.

INTERVIEWER: Not enough.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve been in the job for just over six months, one of the first thing that it was we we got this dam project underway up in Hughenden. We've got a half a billion dollar water fund which is designed to get a lot of these projects moving. So look I don't agree… sorry I do agree, I should say, with the idea that we need to get this water infrastructure. One of the other things that…

INTERVIEWER: You could feed Asia, you could feed Asia, people would willingly live west of the Great Dividing Range and the quality of life if they knew they weren't going to be immersed and surrounded and enveloped by drought. And we have to guarantee water. Harvesting does that.

PRIME MINISTER: Agreed.  

INTERVIEWER: OK, one other thing because we're both running out of time here. I'm just wondering whether you would, because governments interfere and intervene notions they interfere. Intervene often in issues of great crisis. I'm putting to you the dairy industry is in crisis. Now, Coles and Aldi have said, ‘oh well we'll lift the price for home brand milk’ and so on. The problem is not at the retail level. Prime Minister. The problem is at the farm gate. Now at the moment there's a drought on. That means the cows produce less milk. The price of food goes up, the hay and the grain goes up and the processors, mostly foreign owned, are screwing the dairy farmer. Now, I know you're going to call people in over social media and well done about that and say listen there's got to be some responsibility along with the profits. But why wouldn't you call these processors in and say look, enough is enough. I've seen it all. You're not going to continue to rip off the dairy farmer. You have to renegotiate the farm gate price so that the cost of production is not greater than the price he's getting for his milk. Forget Coles and Woolworths. They're not the problem.

PRIME MINISTER: Well as you already noted there has been sort of movement on this as we've seen reported today. And I think that's well…

INTERVIEWER: That’s Coles and Woolworths, that’s not farm gate prices. These people are on contracts. The ACCC have said these contracts that have been entered to by the poor dairy farmer are extortionate. Why doesn't someone speak to the processors and say you can't go on like this. If you can't regulate yourself, we will.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think that's a fair point to be made to them and this is what David Littleproud and I will continue to do with those very producers and the ACCC as you rightly say should have an important role in that because they have the power to move prosecutions in these cases. And remember, it was our Government that introduced the effects test. That was introduced by our Government which actually started to level the playing field between the big companies and whether they be, you know, the big milk producers or others, the wholesalers or the retailers. The milk code conduct, the dairy code of conduct, that is someone with already taken action on. And we've been doing that into partnership with industry. But I do know the frustrations. I was down in the seat of Gilmore the other day I heard it loud and clear, so there is a lot more work to do on that front and David Littleproud and I will continue to progress that.

INTERVIEWER: OK, good. I'll let you go. But it isn't fair, is it, to put it in very simple language, PM. Supposing you're a dairy farmer, you are working all hours of the day and night. It's an important industry. It’s on our breakfast table every day. The Tasmanian farms have already been sold to Canada to China. So what we've got left we've got to look after. Now, why would we say to any Australian that the price of your commodity will be less than the cost of providing it? And farmers are desperate. We're talking suicide and everything here, PM. I mean, they're looking to you just say - you said at Gilmore - I understand it, these are foreign owned processors, I'm going to pull them in and say something's got to be done.

PRIME MINISTER: Well there's a lot more work to be done on that. There's no doubt about that.

INTERVIEWER: Can you report to us on what progress you will be able to make.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes I will.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you. Good to talk to you, thank you for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Alan.

MICHAEL USHER: Prime Minister thank you for your time this evening. It really is a lot to take in, quite overwhelming in fact, You’ve been briefed at the highest levels today. The main suspect is from our country. What is the Australian Federal Police investigating tonight? What might you be able to shed some light on there?

PRIME MINISTER: Well the investigation is spanning both obviously New Zealand and here in Australia. The Joint Counter Terrorism operations which investigate these matters have been stood up here in New South Wales and investigations are being undertaken now in relation to this individual. He’s an Australian-born citizen and he is a right-wing, extremist, violent terrorist. That’s what he is and we’ve got to call this out for what it is.

It has just been the most shocking and shuddering of events and particularly, our hearts go out to all New Zealanders and to all those of Islamic faith here in Australia as well as in New Zealand. We just want to reach out to them today and say; “We will stand with you.”

USHER: Prime Minister it is an uncomfortable, even sickening truth that this shooter is a home-grown terrorist from New South Wales. Can you reassure us on an any of the information that you may have, that he has no further links or supporters here?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I can’t offer too much comment on these things this evening, other than to say that in response to these terrorist incidents there is an automatic process which our authorities and police around the country immediately move into. That has been undertaken and that happened earlier today. All steps are taken to ensure the safety of Australians and there is a high level of cooperation directly between New Zealand and Australian authorities. They are investigating and taking action in relation to this terrorist act.

USHER: Do we need to be concerned about any similar attacks here? Any extra protection for mosques in particular?

PRIME MINISTER: Well these steps are already being taken as you’d expect them to be. The terrorist threat level in Australia remains unchanged on the advice of ASIO to me today. But always, always, I think we need to be mindful of these threats. Terrorism comes in all forms and in this case, it came in the form of right-wing radical extremism.

USHER: It’s good advice of yours, to give everyone a hug on this subject, but what do we say to New Zealand, our closest friends, this will never be forgotten?

PRIME MINISTER: We say kia kaha, which is Maori for “stay strong”. Whanau is the word for family in Maori and that’s how we see New Zealanders and I expressed our sincere condolences to all of them, our sympathies and our prayers and thoughts and I wished Prime Minister Ardern - who I will be speaking with again - every support we can provide to them at this time. Christchurch is such a peaceful place. It has been rocked by tragedy before, but not of this kind. This is a very evil kind and we will be doing everything to support them in very possible way we can.

USHER: Indeed. Alright Prime Minister we really appreciate your time, thank you.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, good afternoon.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Ben, g’day from Perth.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for joining us. You went to Christmas Island yesterday. What did you find?

PRIME MINISTER: Well they've been able to stand up the facility as we asked them to do a couple of weeks ago. That's what was recommended to us after the Labor Party voted to undermine our border protection laws. The Department of Home Affairs said we will now need to set up Christmas Island again. We'd be closed it last year. So it's been stood up. The medical facilities are there. It's ready to receive people who may be transferred under this new scheme. But what it sends a very clear message about is to those who are looking to game this new loophole, well you won't be coming to the mainland - you'll be going to Christmas Island into a very hardened in detention facility.

INTERVIEWER: What kind of condition is it in, if it hasn't been used for a year? Is it full of cobwebs and mothballs?

PRIME MINISTER: No, no, it was all shut down about October last year and so when they do that and decommission a facility like that, they have a procedure for actually standing it up again. That's what's called a hot contingency, so that means that they can stand it up again pretty quickly, which they've done. And those services are there and you know there's the education books coming back out in the adjacent rooms and the other facilities are put in place. So it's ready to receive. But my hope is that the way we've dealt with this and firmed up our border protection regime to cater for when Bill Shorten sought to weaken, that hopefully it won't get that much that much use.

INTERVIEWER: So you’re not expecting boats?

PRIME MINISTER: Well not under us, no. I think our border protection regime, I think people smugglers know that when they come up against me they've got a brick wall. If they come up against Bill Shorten, there's an open door. And so the one thing standing I think between those boats and Australia is our Government You know you never give an absolute guarantee on that because as you know there's you know 10,000 people plus up in Indonesia alone who would get on a boat tomorrow if they thought they could get through. But they know we will turn them back, they know we will send them to Nauru but they don't know that about Bill Shorten because he's had umpteen different positions on this and is led around the nose by Tanya Plibersek on border protection.

INTERVIEWER: The Medivac thing is now reality, right? So are you thinking that there are going to be boats coming and is there any suggestion that we've seen any leave?

PRIME MINISTER: Well what we're seeing is that people know that we're still the Government and that they know I’ll turn boats back. That's what they're certain of. They know that the border protection regime was weakened by the Labor Party and the law. But they also know that I took immediate action to compensate for that by strengthening what we're doing with Operation Sovereign Borders but also you know that they know if you're sitting on Manus Island now then you're not getting to go to Bondi for treatment. You've got to go to Christmas Island and be in a detention facility. That's where you'll receive your treatment.

INTERVIEWER: So Christmas Island yesterday, in WA today what do what are you up to? Are you on the election campaign trail already?

PRIME MINISTER: Well for the last six months, Ben, since I've taken over as Prime Minister, it's been my task really to get out to Australians all over the country and explain what we're doing as a Government, where we're going to take Australia after the next election if we're successful. This morning I was down at the Henderson wharf facility where we're actually doing all the maintenance on all the frigates. That's a huge project for Western Australia, it's a $900 billion contract to maintain and upgrade those frigates. We're building the offshore patrol vessels, the Pacific patrol boats over here as well. Investing in those defence contracts is actually very important for our economy. We're hitting some headwinds in our economy and so using our defence procurement as a way of actually supporting jobs and industry, not just in Western Australia but right across the country.

INTERVIEWER: We had a hint of those headwinds yesterday. Were you worried about those economic figures out yesterday? They were indicating if it wasn't for population growth we'd be in recession. Are you still confident about getting back into surplus?

PRIME MINISTER: Well no that's not quite what it said, to be honest. I mean, the Labor Party came up with some new language on these things which was to spin, but the economy is still growing at 2.3 per cent. The economy is growing. That's what it is doing. And I wasn't surprised to see that yesterday because as I've been warning now for some period of time what we're seeing overseas, the softening in global market conditions, then they're not things Australia has control over but they'll have an impact here. So my very simple point is now is not the time - in fact never is the time in my view - but you don't go and deal with a soft global economy by putting $200 billion of higher taxes on your economy, including a $5 billion dollar a year tax on retirees, abolishing negative gearing as we know it, putting up capital gains tax and halving the income tax cuts that we've already legislated for Australians right across right across the spectrum. I mean, that's not how you actually put your economy into a more resilient position. That's what the Labor Party wants to do and I think it will be very, very damaging for our economy if they are allowed to do that.

INTERVIEWER: When I mentioned that about, you know, if it wasn't for population growth we'd be in recession. I spoke to Terry McCrann yesterday, the business writer from NewsCorp. He almost dropped a swear word, Prime Minister, when he was on the show accidentally. He said, “We are high on the speed of immigration but if you take immigration out of the mix the economy is in deep shhhhh.” And then I had to jump in and save him. So do you disagree with that analysis from Terry McCrann?

PRIME MINISTER: Income per capita, disposable income per capita, these measures show that positive position over the last 12 months and that's been an improvement. Non mining investment also grew yesterday. I mean, what we've seen on business investment is the mining sector continued to lag on investment and that has not been helping the economy go forward. What's been making up for that is the big investments we've been making them in services and infrastructure. That's been important because when you have $80 billion of mining investment stripped out of the economy coming on the downside of the mining investment boom then that's going to have an impact. And that's why we’ve been doing what we're doing in defence industry, infrastructure and other things to ensure that the economy is continued to grow and that's why we've been able to retain our Triple A credit rating. But the great risk of Labor is that they go and get rid of negative gearing as we know it and put up capital gains tax by 50 per cent on these assets. What that will simply do was usher in a hard landing in our housing market and it's already soft now. You go and do that and you only worsen the situation and we all know what that will mean for the economy. So look, I think Terry is right to highlight that there are some real vulnerabilities and risks. And that's why you need to be doing things that are sensible in your economy, investing in the infrastructure and not dampening the economy through higher taxes.

INTERVIEWER: I know you're tight on time so let me squeeze in a few more and I thank you very much for calling in by the way, we appreciate it. Bill Shorten says the next election will be a referendum on wages and we know wages are too low, they haven't budged in years. I'm guessing you don't have the power to wave the magic wand and guarantee workers a pay rise?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's why you need your economy to be strong and the only people are going to get a wage rise under Bill Shorten are the people smugglers. That's who is going to get a wage rise under him. As a result of his policies, because he's an open door when it comes to those issues. But I mean, people in the construction industry aren't going to have wage rises under Bill Shorten, he's going to shut the industry down through what he's doing on negative gearing. People who work in the mining industry aren't going to have that because his Cabinet would be quite happy and would think it was wonderful that our mining industry was having problems. He's not standing with them. So I don't know which workers he is actually standing up for. But under our policies the economy will be in a much better shape than it would under Labor, which means you've got a better chance for a wage rise. And on his emissions reduction target of 45 per cent - 45 per cent - versus ours of 26. That means they have to find three times the amount of emissions and that will mean a 9,000 cut to wages over the next 10 years in 2030, by following that policy.

INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you about the reports out today about this Chinese company that is backed by the Chinese government wanting to build a massive new coal fired power plant in the Hunter Valley. One of your MPs Craig Kelly says it's fantastic. Now, I gather this is a matter for the New South Wales Government but as Prime Minister of Australia, do you have a problem with a Chinese-owned company owning a key part of our power supply?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there are Chinese companies that already do own parts of coal mining operations in New South Wales currently and otherwise those operations probably wouldn’t even be there, which is no good for those who work in those places. But that particular project, there is no federal involvement in that. It would have to follow the normal further approval processes, I imagine. But that’s a matter for the state government, we’re not involved in that.

INTERVIEWER: OK quick one, as a rugby league fan, what do you make of the NRL players involved in leaked videos in these sex tapes? I know that Phil Gould from the Penrith Panthers says this goes beyond sport, it’s a massive issue for Australians mums and dads. What’s your message to younger people who are facing these issues, that… well, they can basically ruin lives in an instant and we’re seeing that at the moment. What’s your message?

PRIME MINISTER: I just think this is just appalling. I mean, as a fan of the game, as fans, that’s who I identify with. I love going along to the game but I mean, this week I announced $328 million to support programs to prevent violence against women and people have got to lift their act. They’ve got to lift their game.

INTERVIEWER: We appreciate you calling in, when are you heading back our way?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll be back there on the weekend and I’ll be back there to be with Gladys at the election campaign launch on the weekend. I was with her on Monday when we announced the Western Sydney International Nancy-Bird Walton Airport which was very exciting. I know many of your listeners would now be able to drive past out there on Elizabeth Drive and see the wonderful picture there of Nancy-Bird. To have one of our airports in Sydney named after our greatest male aviation pioneer and to have Nancy-Bird Walton which was one of his first, I think his first student, and the first women in the Commonwealth, not just Australia, to get a commercial pilots licence. That’s a great tribute to women, I think, in Australia and New South Wales in particular.

INTERVIEWER: No doubt about it. On a lighter note before I let you go, Ray Williams who is a Minister here in NSW, we have named and shamed him today for using photos on his election posters from about 30 years ago when he had jet black hair. Are we going to see current photos of Scott Morrison on his election posters or old ones?

PRIME MINISTER: No, no you will see current ones.

INTERVIEWER: With photoshopped shoes or real shoes?

PRIME MINISTER: No, the Prime Minister and Cabinet Department won’t be responsible for that so we’ll make sure my real shoes are in the photo, no problem. And you’ll have to see me all in my white-haired glory.

INTERVIEWER: I’ll be watching, thanks very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you Ben.

GARETH PARKER: On the line is the Prime Minister Scott Morrison. Good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Gareth, it's great to be here the west.

PARKER: Appreciate your time. You’re here in Perth, we will come to that. You worried about the economy though?

PRIME MINISTER: I've been saying for some time that these headwinds we're seeing around the world, whether it's the China-US trade issues, strategic sort of tensions. What's happening with Brexit. Europe. I mean, there is some real headwinds in the economy at the moment. And we're faring better than pretty much all of the G7 economies except for the United States at the moment and that's why it’s important we keep doubling down on supporting small businesses, reducing taxes and the investments where I've just come from out in Henderson here in Western Australia. I mean, $900 million dollars in sustainment maintenance activities, $1.5 billion going into the infrastructure to support the patrol boats. So these are the things that will keep that economy moving.

PARKER: OK. But I guess in a way that's sort of the point. What the national accounts revealed yesterday is that the only thing that's really propping up the economy is government spending, the private part of the economy is really, really weak.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's… the non-mining investment was actually up, mining investment was down. When you put the two together the combined impact of mining investment with the others showed that reducing, but non-mining investment actually improved and that's to be, I think, that's to be importantly noted. But that's why it's important that the mining sector and the resource sector are to be supported and appreciated. I mean, the Labor Party actually are welcoming the fact that the mining industry is facing some difficult times with global markets. I mean they described it as wonderful. I mean that's just nuts.

PARKER: OK. But households at the moment are nervous. I mean, you know how it works. In this state we've been struggling with house prices and the consumer economy has been really weak for years. But we're starting to see this hit Sydney and Melbourne as well, which given their importance to the national economy, is a pretty big problem I think.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's why you wouldn't go and put $200 billion of extra taxes on the economy. That's why you wouldn't abolish negative gearing and put up capital gains tax, it's why you wouldn't go and slug retirees $5 billion a year, 85,000 Western Australians to strip their franked different dividends away from them with their with their credits. That would be a recipe for real damage to our Australian economy and that's what Bill Shorten is proposing. I'm not going to do any of those things, I'm actually cutting taxes.

PARKER: OK. What's on the agenda here in Perth? You’ve been in Henderson this morning what else we up to?

PRIME MINISTER: This afternoon I will be up in the electorate of Cowan, we’ve got a meeting there with a lot of the multicultural communities that are there and I'm looking forward to sitting down with them. I'll be with Christian Porter later today. We're also making some... doing some further work on some of the domestic violence issues and following up some of the funding we announced earlier this week. So it's you know it's an important visit but where I was this morning was very important. I mean that is a huge investment we're making in the defence industry here and the supply chain impacts of that investment right across hundreds and hundreds of companies. You know, it's a huge industry and we're talking about generational jobs. I mean, I met people there this morning who'd been there for 32 years there. Their son works there and I suspect grandsons will work there eventually. There's just intergenerational jobs we're creating out there at Henderson

PARKER:  You can't afford to lose any seats in WA, can you? But the Labor Party is coming for them.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I can't afford to lose any seats anywhere in the country. And this is why our plan for a stronger economy, keeping our national security strength in place, and that is particularly the case in terms of border protection. I mean, Bill Shorten has been caught out. As I said yesterday, when people smugglers see me they see a brick wall. When they see Bill Shorten, they see an open door and you can see that in terms of his reaction to the issues on Christmas Island where I was yesterday.

PARKER: We’ll come back on Christmas Island, but I just I just want to focus on Perth for the moment. I mean it's... you're right. You can't afford to lose any seats, but here in the West, what's happened in previous election campaigns is the WA Liberal Party's been really strong particularly with money. My mail, and it's widely accepted, is that the WA Liberal Party at the moment is on the bones of its bum financially. You doing any fundraisers while you're here as well?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I always am and they're always very well attended. I don’t know where you're getting your intel from but I know in terms of the federal election it's far stronger than it was going into the last federal election.

PARKER: You’re not going to have Malcolm Turnbull's $1.5 billion to fall back on, are you?

PRIME MINISTER: Well no, we have actually got a lot more than that, that has come from support from businesses and individuals all across the country who understand what $200 billion of higher taxes will mean for the economy. How it will be a sheet anchor that will hold back jobs, it will hold back wages, it will hold back the growth in the business community that we need to support all of those economic outcomes. But it goes further that. If you don't have a strong economy, then you can't meet your commitments when it comes to health and education and affordable medicines, all things we've done under our Government. Bulk billing is at record levels. Record levels.

PARKER: The Christmas Island visit, was that a legitimate need for the Prime Minister to go there? No Prime Minister has been there before. Or was it just a political stunt so you could whack Bill Shorten over the head with the issue?

PRIME MINISTER: Well Tanya Plibersek said this week that the Prime Minister has to explain to the Australian people how the facilities on Christmas Island are going to meet the need for what is now before us. That's exactly what I did yesterday. I mean, the Labor Party can't have it both ways. They can't say I need to explain to the Australian people, and when I go and do it and demonstrate it and show them how it's going to work, then they complain the other way. I'll tell you why the Labor Party doesn't want to talk about Christmas Island ever, because it is the scene of Australia's greatest ever policy failure that happened on their watch. They want to pretend like Christmas Island never existed in the Labor Party. The riots, the fires, the tragedies. Four and five boats turning up every single day. That's what happened at Christmas Island. And Labor wants to pretend like it never happened. So when I make this very clear point that I am now having to reopen the Christmas Island detention facility that I closed last year because of Labor weakening our border protection laws in the Parliament under the Shorten's law. Well, the Labor Party doesn't like it but the Australian public deserve to know.

PARKER: The warning was that when the Medivac Bill passed there'd be hundreds of applications immediately. How many applications have there been?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's the law has only just come into place in the last couple of days.

PARKER: But the suggestion was our ready to go. So how many applications have been made?

PRIME MINISTER: What we're seeing is the asylum advocates and others are putting their plans together putting their talking points together.

PARKER: Has there been any applications made?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to give you a running commentary.

PARKER: But have there been any applications made?

PRIME MINISTER: Gareth let me make this point. The reason we have reopened Christmas Island and this is working, is to ensure that those who thought they could game the system and find their way to Perth or Sydney or Melbourne or Brisbane - no, you'll be going to Christmas Island. You'll be in a hardened detention facility. And that was the advice that was given to us by Home Affairs that we needed that facility particularly. I mean, we've got people...

PARKER: I can understand that there's probably some pretty significant deterrent effect there by saying you're not coming to the mainland, you’re going to Christmas Island but I'm just wondering, because the advice was that saying that the applications were ready to go. I'm just wondering have there been any yet? It sounds like they haven't.

PRIME MINISTER: There will be applications, I have no doubt about it, and the asylum groups are doing what they always do and that is seeking to undermine the Government's policies. But the reason we had that advice from Home Affairs is we had to remove any incentive effect for those who were looking to game the system like always happens and it strikes me that our reaction, by reopening Christmas Island, is having the desired effect and in the same way it's having the effect of deterring boats from coming to Australia. It’s my job, I don't want to see too many people transferred by gaming the system at all. So you know, if there turns out to be fewer applications, it'll be because the Government got the response right. Bill Shorten weakened the laws, I strengthen the system.

PARKER: Could Julie Bishop have beaten Bill Shorten if she was PM?

PRIME MINISTER: It's a moot point.

PARKER: It is a moot point I agree. But I'm just interested. What do you think?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't offer opinions on this, it's my job to beat it and that's what I'm doing and that's what the party elected me to do.

PARKER: Does it help you beat him for her to say that only she could beaten him?

PRIME MINISTER: No it's for you guys to talk about. I don't really engage in that stuff, other than to thank Julie for the tremendous service to Western Australia, a tremendous service to the Parliament. I've worked alongside Julie for many years in the Cabinet and I thank her for her patriotic service to our country and our Party.

PARKER: You interested in helping the WACA fund their redevelopment ambitions?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's with Mark McGowan. They're the ones doing the assessment. I brought a cheque with $1.3 billion effectively with me because of what I'm honouring the GST deal, which is you know we had to legislate. I designed it, we legislated and that means they'll get, Western Australia will get, $1.3 billion extra than they would have otherwise got. So I think West Australians know that they can trust me when it comes to my commitments and I've made them. I would just... it's up to the state government how they spend that money. But $1.3 billion I think gives them a lot more room to move than they've had otherwise to do whatever they consider to be the priorities and if they consider that a priority, well that's a matter for them.

PARKER: So sounds like you're not that keen.

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's a Western Australian state government issue, it's not it's not necessarily a Federal Government issue. They're assessing the project at the moment, not the Commonwealth Government, and they have $1.3 billion dollars that they wouldn't otherwise have had if it were not for my Government.

PARKER: OK. Christian Porter just told us earlier that he's been lobbying hard on this one.

PRIME MINISTER: Lots of members lobby about lots of things.

PARKER: OK, we'll have to wait and see then. Scott Morrison, I appreciate your time. Thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot. Good to be here and thanks for having me on.

INTERVIEWER: A new recovery agency will be set up to develop a long-term plan to rebuild the shattered industry, and beef producers will be offered cheaper loans, under a $2 billion plan to subsidise their debt. Scott Morrison is about to fly north to Townsville for this announcement. Before he takes up, he joins us this morning. Prime Minister, welcome back to breakfast.

PRIME MINISTER: Good to be there Fran, good to be here.

INTERVIEWER: This is about rebuilding and reconstruction. Despite all this help though, do you think the North Queensland cattle industry will ever be the same?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I believe it will, but it’s going to take a lot of work to get there. And as you rightly said, we’ve got to do this station by station, farm by farm. I was up there a few weeks ago and talked to a lot of farmers and all of their properties are different. The way they raise their herd genetically, what markets they play to. It’s going to require a business plan for each and every, single farm and station and the support we’re providing to them will enable them to realise those plans. So for some, they’ll be able to get up on their feet much sooner. For others it’ll take much longer. And for some, I mean, to rebuild their herds genetically to where they’ve been, that will take a generation. But in all cases, I know that they’ll all be working very hard to rebuild not just the businesses, very successful businesses that they were running in their farms, but the livestock that is so central, I think, to Australia’s identity.

INTERVIEWER: You’re doing it through something you’re establishing called the North Queensland Livestock Industry Recovery Agency. Its job is to help rebuild farm infrastructure, restock the herds as you’ve just been saying. Do we have a final price tag for how much this is going to cost, or the government’s prepared to spend?

PRIME MINISTER: No we don’t, because we really still don’t even know the full extent of the losses. I mean, there’s been estimates of half a million stock lost, but I’ve heard higher than that. And you know, the water is still draining. I mean, when I was up there a little while ago stock was still dying from pneumonia…

INTERVIEWER: So this comes without a budget allocation yet?

PRIME MINISTER: No, we will do what is necessary. There are three tools particularly when it comes to the livestock industry. The first one is to be able to restructure their existing loans, so we can take some of the immediate pressure off the debt that they have. And some of them are quite extensive. Not all of them. But that will be either done through their bank - and many will want to do it through their bank, because they have so many other relationships that will have an arrangement to ensure that they can get payment holidays, and all of these things for some years - to ensure that they get back on their feet. But when it comes to restocking the herd, there will be two components. There will be grants to support restocking. And there will be loans, which again can be done either by the bank or through the regional investment corporation. Where those loans for those stock can be secured against stock, not against their properties, and this is incredibly important. This is one of the key pieces of feedback I got from the farmers. When we restock, we need to be able to secure the loans against the stock. So we’re helping in two ways, (a) by putting, effectively putting equity into that stock through the grants and that means the banks and the regional investment corporation can loan the balance. And for every property, those restocking programs will be different. And they’ll have their plans for doing that based on their country.

INTERVIEWER: Ok, according to your announcement there’s $2 billion there for loans by the government being offered through the banks - that’s how I understand it - at a lower interest rate. How cheap will these loans be? Are you fixing an interest rate and how can you be sure the lower rates will be passed onto the farmers. How do you monitor that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there’s two things. And look, the overall estimate there is an estimate so whether it’s that much… I mean already we’ve put $110 million out since the floods both in Townsville and across North Queensland…

INTERVIEWER: This is different though, through the banks isn’t it? Isn’t it banks are being... you’re essentially under-writing these bank loans.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s basically… it’s a form of guarantee and which will reduce the costs to farms which means all of that cost of funds, will be passed on to each of the farmers in their restructuring of their existing debts and that is the same for the restocking loans as well. But the backstop on all this, is we can do it through the Regional Investment Corporation. So you know … what is effectively the government’s bank.

INTERVIEWER: Ok

PRIME MINISTER: And so, if there’s not a better deal coming from the bank, then we can offer that directly through the regional investment corporation.

INTERVIEWER: And how good is that deal? What’s the rate?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it’s going to depend on people’s holding. But it’s going to be a hell of a lot lower than they’re paying right now. Basically what the cost of funds is for what the government gets. So at the moment that’s around 2.7-3, but in some cases you can structure the debt so it could be as low as 1 per cent. Depending on how you, you know, work through the programme and this is why the authority is so important Fran. Because this has to be worked out, farm by farm, station by station. So this is why we’re appointing this authority to work with every single station, on their business plan. Because one of the things that was said to me by a very canny farmer up in Julia Creek, in the pub, was we don’t want compensation, we want reconstruction. And so we’re going to partner with them in that reconstruction. Beast by beast, on every property.

INTERVIEWER: You’re listening to RN Breakfast, our guest is the Prime Minister Scott Morrison on his way to Townsville to offer this reconstruction package for farmers. On other issues Prime Minister, Queensland floods, which due to unprecedented rainfall takes us to climate. According to the weather bureau our country has just endured its hottest summer on record. We’ve also seen just this week the government’s most up-to-date figures on emissions levels show that carbon output continues to rise…

PRIME MINISTER: Well actually, we’re down on the last one Fran.

INTERVIEWER: No, that last… to the year to the…

PRIME MINISTER: On the quarterly result actually went down, look we should point that out.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, but over the year to September 2018, emissions were up 0.9%.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m not disputing that, I’m just saying it actually went down in the last quarter. These numbers do jump around a bit.

INTERVIEWER: Ok, but the government keeps telling us emissions are falling. Your own data shows that over the past year, up to September 2018, they didn’t fall, they went up.

PRIME MINISTER: Well emissions fell 1.4% relative to the June quarter. That’s actually what happened. That’s driven by the lowest quarterly emissions from the electricity sector in more than a decade. So these numbers do jump about but our emissions reductions targets are actually based on a rebate are to 2030 and I set that out very clearly on Monday as to how we’re going to meet that commitment. Now, what? It’s been five days now, and the Labour party still hasn’t told us how they’re going to meet their commitment. I mean people can criticise my target. They’re welcome to do that. But I’ve laid out very clearly how I’m going to meet it. Bill Shorten has not done that, he’s talking around a 45% emissions reduction target when it costs people 9000 bucks a year, and he’s not actually telling them how he’s actually going to meet the target. So at least I’m telling people and being transparent and up front about it.

INTERVIEWER: Well, your figures show the emissions are going up but let’s put that aside because what has happened this week is you’ve really emerged I think as almost an evangelical supporter of pumped hydro. There’s really been no mention of coal this week. Will all this pumped hydro into the system, will this dispatchable baseload power… we won’t need new coal to provide the same will we?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look they’re decisions that’ll be made by investors and suppliers, and energy companies and others in terms of how they’re meeting supply to the market. What I’m saying is that is a key part of our emissions abatement. Because remember, let’s be clear, the 2030 target is based on a budget for carbon abatement. So you have to meet a tonnage level of abatement over that period. Now for us that means we’ve got to find 320 million tonnes of abatement and we’re on track to achieve that, certainly on track to hit 2020. In fact, beat it by 367 million tonnes. Now Labour’s plan of 45 per cent would require, on the same accounting basis, three times the amount of abatement by 2030. I’m simply saying, Bill, how are you going to get there? I’ve told the Australian people how I’m going to get there, and he should tell them how they’re going to get there. Because, you know, is he going to borrow foreign carbon credits? We’re not doing that. We’re not buying any foreign carbon credits under our plan.

INTERVIEWER: Well you are using 328 million tonnes of Kyoto credits.

PRIME MINISTER: No, they’re Australia’s credits because we achieved them. We actually will over perform on the 2020 targets.

INTERVIEWER: Ok

PRIME MINISTER: And when Kyoto was set Fran, it was set on the basis that you could carry over credits.

INTERVIEWER: Ok

PRIME MINISTER: Why? Because they wanted to encourage countries to overachieve…

INTERVIEWER: But what I’m asking you… what I’m asking you is in the government underwriting process that’s underway. You’ve already named one program today... this week that’s in Tasmania with pumped hydro. Does that mean with all this pumped hydro, the government won’t be needing to underwrite new coal?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I’m not making any statements on that…

INTERVIEWER: Well why would we need to with all this pumped hydro.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, they are decisions that’ll be made within the energy market. And what we’re doing outside…

INTERVIEWER: Well no this is a government decision I’m talking about, underwriting the government, taxpayer’s money.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we have a process in place for that. We’ve made no announcements on that process Fran, so I’m not going to pre-judge that. The role that the pumped hydro plays… we’ve got record investment already coming in the renewable sector. And if you don’t have the storage capacity, which we are building in both in Snowy 2.0 and the pumped hydro project in Tasmania, you basically have to dump that renewable power. What this does is provide the firming opportunity, through pumped hydro, which means you don’t have to dump that, which means lower electricity prices. So pumped hydro has been a missing piece of our energy puzzle. And if we’re going to meet our obligations to future generations, just like all of those hydro developers back in Tasmania did 50 years ago, and people railed against them at the time and eventually stopped them from doing it. I mean that has turned out to be the thing that actually makes renewables work and make them reliable for the future. So that’s why we’re supporting it, it just makes a lot of sense.

INTERVIEWER: You’re listening to breakfast, its fourteen to eight, our guest is the Prime Minister. Prime Minister, also this week the government hailed the departure of the last children off Nauru as a big achievement, which it undoubtedly was. There are still about 1000 adults there on Nauru and Manus Island. US resettlement program won’t cater for all of them. What happens to them? Are they just going to be left indefinitely on Nauru and Manus?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, in both countries where they’ve been found refugees, they’re living in countries that have signed the refugee convention. The refugee convention…

INTERVIEWER: So that’s the plan they just stay on Nauru and Manus.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that’s exactly what Labour set out when they announced that they were going there in the first place. That they said they’d never be resettled in Australia. So we…

INTERVIEWER: So that is our government… the Australian government’s plan?

PRIME MINISTER: I haven’t changed the policy on that. The Labour party have sought to change it by effectively abolishing offshore processing by what they did in the Parliament. And to provide a loophole to allow people to come to Australia from both of those countries simply for the purpose of the medical assessment, which they can get quite ably on Manus and Nauru, particularly Nauru, where there’s 60 medical professionals… 1 for every 7 people.

INTERVIEWER: Well just on that… just on that and you know there’s hundreds doctors who argue with you on that but your Minister Peter Dutton this week has warned that Australians will be kicked off waiting lists for hospitals and public housing by an influx of transferees under that legislation. There’s so far only about 70 refugees and asylum seekers requiring medical evacuation. Even if that number was in the hundreds, given they’re going to Christmas Island, not the mainland. Isn’t this just scaremongering from your Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: If someone needs… this is what currently happens. If someone needs very serious medical attention. They’ve always been getting it, they’ve always been brought to Australia for it and some of them have gone to Port Moresby, some have gone to Taiwan! To receive … to be treated….

INTERVIEWER: And 900 have come to Australia and that hasn’t seemed to undermine the border protection policy.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we didn’t change the border policy. What Labour did in the Parliament was change the policy and the setting. And…

INTERVIEWER: Isn’t it scaremongering to say this will keep people off the public waiting list?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it’s not Fran. It’s just a simple fact. If we’re going to treat more people in Australia then obviously they’re going to take the place of people who were getting that treatment anyway. It’s just simple math.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.

PRIME MINISTER: Well thanks Fran, one last thing before I go. The other thing we’re announcing in Townsville today, is the small business assistance. So this is for flood-affected small businesses in Townsville. That assistance will go from $25,000 to $50,000 today under the Category D announcement, that the Premier and I have agreed this week. So, one of the reasons I’m going to Townsville is that we’re delivering additional support to Townsville small business that have obviously been devastated by those floods as well.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Fran. Bye.

INTERVIEWER: So you’ve gone from coal-aphobia to recognising a climate emergency. What’s your credibility on climate policy?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, those things are mutually exclusive, Jon. I mean, we are allowed to have reliable energy. That’s okay. And we’re also able to reduce our emissions. These two things can be achieved. And how do I know that? Because that’s exactly what we’ve been doing. When we came to government in 2013, we inherited a more than-700 million tonne deficit on meeting our 2020 emissions targets. Now we’re going to beat that by 367 million tonnes through the measures that I am saying will be extended today. And that’s continued to occur…

INTERVIEWER: Five years after this virtually the same proposal was abandoned, so we’ve lost five years.

PRIME MINISTER: It wasn’t abandoned. It hasn’t been abandoned. It’s been running for the last five years. I mean there are…

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, what you’re announcing today?

PRIME MINISTER: That program has been running and we’re extending it as part of what I’m announcing today.

INTERVIEWER: You’re allocating more funds for more of it…

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: It’s been undersold, underprepared, underrun…

PRIME MINISTER: No, Jon, none of that is true.

INTERVIEWER: And now suddenly you’re saying, ‘We’ve got an election coming we’ve got to crank it up.’

PRIME MINISTER: No, Jon, none of what you’ve just said is true at all. What we’ve been…

INTERVIEWER: That’s the ACF’s analysis of it.

PRIME MINISTER: They’re welcome to make their commentary, like anyone is. But we have been running this program and it’s been responsible for around 200 million tonnes of abatement over the period of running those programs. It has been a successful program that has helped us meet our existing targets, the 2020 target, which we will now beat by 367 million tonnes, and will be a key role in meeting our 2030 targets, which we’ll meet in a canter.

INTERVIEWER: Isn’t the reality, in fact though, that you’re on a tightrope, on the one hand you’ve got the coal lobby and the resources sector, some of whom are changing their mind, mind you, on one side, what works with the coal industry is disastrous for people who want action and more action on climate change, and you’re on that tightrope trying to juggle the two.

PRIME MINISTER: No, Jon, what I’ve got is a sensible, practical policy which is based on reducing our emissions, which we need to do and have done, and a plan to keep doing that out to 2030 and meet our targets which will see emissions per capita fall per person by more than 50 percent and our emissions intensity fall by more than two thirds. Now, only Brazil has got a target better than that in the G20. That’s better than everyone else, what we’re doing, and our record of achievement is one that says, we meet our targets when we set them. We set them responsibly. And I don’t believe I have to choose between our environment and our economy. I think both are achievable. And what we’ve got is the runs on the boards to demonstrate that.

INTERVIEWER: And to those who say…

PRIME MINISTER: So these misperceptions that are out there, well that’s for them to explain. All I know is our record.

INTERVIEWER: Too little, too late, is the widely heard rejoinder.

PRIME MINISTER: How can it be ‘too little, too late’ when what we’ve put in place means we exceed our targets by 367 million tonnes? Explain that to me.

INTERVIEWER: Well, those targets keep shifting around, apart from [inaudible].

PRIME MINISTER: No, they don’t. They haven’t moved around at all. We had our 2020 target, which we had, and we’re going to meet it and beat it. We’ve turned around a 700 million tonne deficit that Labor left us, to achieve that target. And we’re going to better it by 367 million tonnes. Now that’s a 1.1 billion tonne turnaround on emission reductions that our government has achieved. Now the plan I’m outlining today builds on that success. See, one of the problems with this debate, Jon, is that it doesn’t focus on the results, I mean, what’s the real test of a policy? That it meets the objectives that it set out to achieve. And that’s exactly what we’ve done. Now there’s been a lot of hot air and shouting at the clouds on this issue, but what we’ve done is just get on and achieve. And our plan to achieve our 2030 targets is based on the success of the policy that we already have in place. And how do I know it is successful? We’re going to beat our target.

INTERVIEWER: Some of that shouting and hot air has come from your side of the ledger.

PRIME MINISTER: Well there’s been plenty of shouting and hot air, Jon, but what I’m saying is…

INTERVIEWER: Well, to those on your side, who have been holding up or even saying there is no need for further action on climate change, what do you say to them today?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, what I’m saying is, whatever people have been saying, we’ve just been getting on with the job. That’s what our government has been doing. See, this is what I’m talking about, the debate runs around, and whether it’s the bubble or anything else, what matters is what gets done. And we believe we need to take action in this area and have been ever since we come to government, turning around, you know, Labor talks big on this, but they left us a 700 million tonne deficit on carbon abatement, and we’ve turned that around by 1.1 billion. So, that’s our record and I stand by it. And it’s with programs that were started, like the Emissions Reduction Fund, it’s continuing the programs of ARENA and CFC and all of this, Battery of the Nation which we’re backing in, and particularly the Marinus Interlink with Tasmania, I mean, that of itself, with reliable hydro, that’s a 2,500 megawatt capacity.

INTERVIEWER: Snowy Hydro 2, still committed?

PRIME MINISTER: Snowy Hydro 2, absolutely, totally.

INTERVIEWER: Okay…

PRIME MINISTER: I mean, that’s all part of the plan.

INTERVIEWER: You know, the Labor Party love it every time you talk about them?

PRIME MINISTER: The Labor Party?

INTERVIEWER: Mmm.

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t really care what they think.

INTERVIEWER: But…

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: But every time you reference them, every time you make them more relevant. They go, ‘Cha-ching, cha-ching, hooray, thank you. That’s the Prime Minister doing our work for us.’

PRIME MINISTER: I’m not quite sure what you’re referring to. When I refer to the Labor Party, I talk about the fact that their emissions reduction targets are going to cost wage earners $9,000 each a year. That’s what the independent evaluation showed last year. You want to talk about the Labor Party…

INTERVIEWER: That’s contested…

PRIME MINISTER: I talk about how they’re going to hit retirees with a $5 billion a year tax.

INTERVIEWER: Well, they’re announcing today a $640 million fund over four years for what they call ‘bank fairness’.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the Labor Party’s answer to every question, Bills Shorten’s answer to every question is higher taxes. I mean, how much tax does he think the Australian economy can bear? He already has it at $200 billion in higher taxes over the next 10 years…

INTERVIEWER: He’s proposing tax relief for most Australians whilst at the same time going to get rid of what he says is a rort…

PRIME MINISTER: Jon, that’s not true…

INTERVIEWER: That some people have exploited through access to franking credits.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m sorry Jon, I’m going to do a fact check on you okay.

INTERVIEWER: Excellent, we like that.

PRIME MINISTER: $144 billion is the legislated tax cuts that we currently have taken through the Parliament. Labor have said they are going to halve that.

INTERVIEWER: Mmhmm.

PRIME MINISTER: So how can they be providing more tax relief when they’re actually halving the amount of tax relief that is currently legislated before the Parliament?

INTERVIEWER: I’ll leave that for Mr Shorten and Mr Bowen to explain but it’s going to be an interesting contest.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, you’re the one who said that they’re cutting taxes.

INTERVIEWER: Well, they, I, I’m referring to what their policy claims are, which is only reasonable.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think they are highly dubious. Bill Shorten’s answer to every question is, ‘I’ll just tax you more.’

INTERVIEWER: Overnight, its been announced by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs that the Dawn Service in France at the Villers-Bretonneux Memorial Centre, the Monash Centre, which has just been completed at a cost of, I think, $100 million, they don’t want to run a Dawn Service anymore, they want to move it to a 10 o’clock ANZAC Day service, what’s your view, is it good or bad?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that’s not gonna happen. I’ve spoken to the Minister this morning, the service will go ahead at dawn as usual.

INTERVIEWER: Because?

PRIME MINISTER: Because that’s the right decision.

INTERVIEWER: Regardless of what it costs and how many people turn up?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I think it’s important to continue the Dawn Service in the way it’s been done. I’ve discussed that matter with the Minister this morning and they will consult with the local community there, but I believe the Dawn Service should continue in its current form and I’ve made that very clear to the Minister this morning.

INTERVIEWER: That will be very welcome news in many quarters, Dawn Services are Dawn Services, they’re not 10 o’clock in the morning/morning tea services.

PRIME MINISTER: I agree. And when this matter was brought to my attention, I dealt with it.

INTERVIEWER: They’re incredibly moving, it’s astonishing that so many people now turn up all over Australia and all around the world.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, well it’s true. I mean, other services, you know, when we have the 11am services on Armistice Day, they are equally also very moving, there’s an importance about that time. Now, I understand that the Villers-Bretonneux service, the dawn element of that is different to what it is at Gallipoli, I mean it was a dawn landing in Gallipoli, but that said, there is a tradition that has developed in recent times about that service in Villers-Bretonneux and I want to ensure the integrity of that is kept because the people I care most about on this is our veterans and how they feel about it.

INTERVIEWER: It’s a cliché for journalists to ask Prime Ministers about Newspoll, and the latest Newspoll’s come out this morning, so I won’t ask you about the figures which show nothing’s changed, but border protection has been a lively issue during the last two weeks, and the figures haven’t budged. Does that mean border protection is not something that changes peoples’ votes?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, whether it is or whether it isn’t is not really my concern. What my concern is that we have strong border protection and that’s the only thing that’s ever motivated me.

INTERVIEWER: And you were hoping that that would result in an improvement for your side in the polls.

PRIME MINISTER: No, I was hoping that I would be able to stop the Labor Party from weakening our border protection. That’s what I was hoping. And now I’m taking action to make sure that it doesn’t.

INTERVIEWER: So Newspoll’s result on this issue specifically, in the last little while, would suggest that the parties are level-pegging on that topic…

PRIME MINISTER: That’s not actually true…

INTERVIEWER: When peoples’ voting intention…

PRIME MINISTER: No, that’s actually not true if you read what the polls said today. I mean, the Coalition is overwhelmingly favoured to the Labor Party when it comes to national security and the economy. But my point is this Jon, when it comes to border protection or these measures, the only thing that ever drives me on this is making sure that it’s strong and secure so I never have to see the human carnage of 1,200 people who died at sea ever again. That’s what motivates me. That’s why I’ve done everything I’ve done in this area.

INTERVIEWER: Would you do the same if it cost you votes?

PRIME MINISTER: I would.

INTERVIEWER: That’s hard to believe.

PRIME MINISTER: Well Jon, you can make up whatever mind you like about this but when it comes to border protection, I don’t think anyone can doubt my conviction, sincerity on this.

INTERVIEWER: I think we all want to see people not drowning…

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I know how to stop that, Jon.

INTERVIEWER: … we also have a view of assessing politicians and what they offer and we always see it through the prism of what’s going to get them re-elected.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, well you see Jon, I have a very unique perspective on this because I was the one who had to stop it. And I had to make the decisions that resulted in that.  So I am probably well qualified to make a judgement about how you stop boats and how you stop deaths at sea. Plenty of other people have opinions that have no consequences but when you are the minister responsible for doing it, you have to make the decisions and you have to deal with the consequences of those decisions. And that’s what I’ve done. And I’ve always done it for one simple purpose. That is, our borders should be strong, and I don’t want to see kids on boats dying.

INTERVIEWER: And it, also, has been a key part of your ascendancy to a leadership position and ultimately being the Prime Minister, which is, I’m not suggesting for a moment that you would only do it for those reasons but the two fit well together.  They fitted, they dove-tailed together.

PRIME MINISTER: So what are you suggesting?

INTERVIEWER: If those policies were unpopular, would you have still pursued them?

PRIME MINISTER:  Yes.  Because some of those policies were unpopular. I remember turnbacks, before the 2013 election. I was lectured on the fact that they wouldn’t work, and that wasn’t actually a particular popular policy, back in 2013.  If you, sort of, have a look back, you’ll see that’s the case.   Regional processing was more acceptable, temporary protection visas was more acceptable.  Well I can tell you, turnbacks was not a popular policy over that time and it was split quite evenly, but I knew that if unless you did that, and did it successfully, you could not stop the boats.  So, I did it with General Campbell and others who were very involved in pulling all that together, and Jim Molan, and we had a plan.  We were mocked about that plan, on the ABC, in Fairfax, in other places.  They mocked us, they said it couldn’t be done, the Labor Party said it couldn’t be done, the Greens said it couldn’t be done.  Well you were wrong. It could be done, it was done. It was achieved. And I am never going to allow our border protection regime, if I have anything to do with it, from being compromised again because the consequences of that are deadly.

INTERVIEWER: So you will do anything you can to get the best laws in place to advance those policies but you rejected the advice of the security agencies on the medevac laws last week …

PRIME MINISTER: No, that’s not true…

INTERVIEWER: and it wasn’t enacted.

PRIME MINISTER: No that’s not true. That report was rubbish.

INTERVIEWER: They said that you could include in Kerryn Phelps’ legislation…

PRIME MINISTER: We opposed the bill.

INTERVIEWER:  …a provision that would allow for people to be medevaced to Australia but then returned.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no…

INTERVIEWER: and you didn’t adopt that recommendation.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no, Jon, you’ve got to stop reading the Saturday paper. It’s not true.  That report is just not true. That bill...

INTERVIEWER: What half of it was not true? That was the advice from the security agency.

PRIME MINISTER: No it wasn’t Jon. It wasn’t.  We declassified the advice. We released the advice.

INTERVIEWER: Partially leaked to the Australian newspaper.

PRIME MINISTER: We declassified the advice so Jon, what you are putting to me…

INTERVIEWER: The security agencies had to say “Hang on, that’s not what we said”..

PRIME MINISTER: No Jon, what you are putting to me is just not true.

INTERVIEWER: What part of it?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m saying the report is not true. Ok? So we acted in accordance with our security advice, and that was, that bill should not be accepted. That bill was going to weaken our border security arrangements…and it has.

INTERVIEWER: That bill can be improved. That bill can be improved with a simple addition

PRIME MINISTER: No, it can’t actually Jon, you can’t. That bill in any form was going to weaken our border protection laws. In any form. Any form.

INTERVIEWER: But if it was going to go through because you no longer control the numbers…

PRIME MINISTER: No, I’m not going to split hairs with you Jon…

INTERVIEWER: … it can be ameliorated and improved.

PRIME MINISTER: …on border protection I don’t trade.  It’s absolute.  And that’s how I act. So, we acted in accordance with our security advice. It’s a bad change to the law. It;s actually now complicated even further, frankly, how these matters are arranged.  But I’ll tell you one thing.  At least people know what my view is on this Jon. I mean Bill Shorten has changed his position on Christmas Island every day. So, I mean, who are you going to trust?  Someone who doesn’t know what they think about this issue and are swayed by whoever spoke to them last.  Or someone who’s actually had very real experience in this area, has got the results, and knows what they think.

INTERVIEWER: 13 minutes to 9, Scott Morrison, the Prime Minister is with me, we’re running out of time rapidly. There’s been several calls over the weekend for you to return to a John Howard definition of ministerial  accountability, which would have seen at least Mathias Cormann, if not others also coming into strife in the last week or two.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think you have made a couple of leaps there Jon.  I mean, I mean, what was discussed last week was shown to be of no substance.

INTERVIEWER: Which bit?

PRIME MINISTER: Well all of it.

INTERVIEWER: Well Mathias Cormann didn’t pay for travel.

PRIME MINISTER: And he paid it back.

INTERVIEWER: It was offered to him, once…

PRIME MINISTER: Once it was drawn to his attention, he paid it back.

INTERVIEWER: Once it was made public.

PRIME MINISTER: Bill Shorten didn’t declare a donation to his own campaign for eight years.  So I am not going to get lectured by the Labor Party.

INTERVIEWER: No it wasn’t the Labor Party actually, I’m not even aware of what the Labor Party…

PRIME MINISTER: Well it was the Labor Party who pulled this out of their…

INTERVIEWER: This doesn’t pass the sniff test…

PRIME MINISTER: …out of their bottom smear draw because they were under pressure in the Parliament. And that’s, look I get it, I get it how all that works…

INTERVIEWER: The Minister in charge of finances who doesn’t look after his own credit card transactions.

PRIME MINISTER: He paid back the money and that’s the end of the matter.

INTERVIEWER: Doesn’t pass the sniff test, does it?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s your assertion.

INTERVIEWER: Major contract goes from a government department to a …

PRIME MINISTER: There’s no link between those Jon, look Jon, if the Labor Party wants to get into those smears, look, I understand that.  But, I, I don’t think I should allow you to draw a connection between those two events because there is no connection between those events, there is none.  There was no connection between Minister Cormann and the decision on that contract.  None. Absolutely none. He wasn’t the decision maker.

INTERVIEWER: And Joe Hockey likewise?

PRIME MINISTER: Joe Hockey is not even a member of the Government.

INTERVIEWER: He says, ‘hang on’…

PRIME MINISTER: Joe works for DFAT. And so I am sure the Secretary will deal with whatever, if any, matters there are to be dealt with as she made clear to estimates last week.  This was a smear campaign by a desperate Labor Party that was under the pump and those who want to sort of support the Labor Party by continuing to give that oxygen well, they can, but that’s what it is.

INTERVIEWER: Ita Buttrose, not on the list, of possible chairs, of the board of this organisation the ABC but certainly well-placed sources in today’s newspapers say even though there were no men on the list that was put to Cabinet, Ita Buttrose may leapfrog the field?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, two things, a) Cabinet have not considered this matter, Cabinet will soon consider this matter. It is true that she was not one of those who have been independently recommended. I can confirm that the independent recommendations did not include a female candidate…

INTERVIEWER: None at all?

PRIME MINISTER: None at all.

INTERVIEWER: What was your reaction when you saw the list?

PRIME MINISTER: Surprise…

INTERVIEWER: Surprise? Disappointment?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, of course.  But, anyway, the Government will make a decision and we will go through the normal processes that are required in terms of consultation with the Opposition and on that, the rules on that are very clear by the way.  But the Labor Party is over assuming on what that entitles them to but they already think they have won the election and that seems to be the way that they’re behaving.

INTERVIEWER: You have meetings with Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews today…

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: What’s on the agenda?

PRIME MINISTER: A number of issues.  I was in Gippsland yesterday, meeting with drought affected farmers, and they have raised a number of issues with me about support.  I mean, the two biggest things they’re seeking Jon is,one the fodder subsidies which are provided in NSW and Queensland, and what that did, is that it has lifted the price of fodder and Victorian farmers are now in a double whammy of having to pay higher prices for their fodder but also not having the subsidies.  Now those subsidies are provided by state governments and they are very keen to see those provided by the state Government.  And the other issue is rate relief.  And again, that’s a matter for state governments.

INTERVIEWER: Local council rate relief?

PRIME MINISTER: Local council rate relief.  I spoke to local farmers yesterday and there rates are in the tens of thousands. I mean, the councils themselves, it’s about 45-50% of their revenue base so they have got a lot of work to do in this area too, so look, I’ll relay that to the Premier.  I think he and I are working quite well together on this issue so I am just, so, l, that’s what they raised with me.  We will continue to provide the support we do through drought assistance.

INTERVIEWER: We are going to see a bit more of you in Victoria in the next few months…

PRIME MINISTER: Oh. I am, you certainly will.  The $5 billion drought fund that went through the House of Representatives.  I was genuinely quite surprised Labor voted against the drought fund.  I mean, I’m still shaking my head about it to be honest.

INTERVIEWER: And we’ve got seats now, Liberal seats which the Labor Party, with what are projected to be swings, seats that they now have within their their gaze, which otherwise they thought were well beyond their reach so we will see more of you.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, elections are always a contest whether it’s are in Victoria, or North Queensland, or Western Australia, we will be everywhere.

INTERVIEWER: Do we clone Scott Morrison’ so you can try and get around more places than you otherwise can?

PRIME MINISTER: (laugh) No, I think one is enough. 

INTERVIEWER: (laugh)

PRIME MINISTER: I think one is enough for you Jon.

INTERVIEWER: No, well, we don’t get enough time…

PRIME MINISTER: Well I am pleased to be here with you today.

INTERVIEWER: We may have an overinflated sense of our self-importance.  We like to see the Prime Minister here in town.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I am happy to be here.

INTERVIEWER: It’s good when we do have the chance.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Jon.

INTERVIEWER: I’ve made you late for your next appointment.  I’ve got your staff glaring at me through the glass, I’ll have to let you go.

PRIME MINISTER: Not a problem.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for your time this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you.

LAURA JAYES: Prime Minister Good morning, if we are to meet our Paris targets in a canter as you have repeatedly promised why do we need to spend another $3.5 billion dollars in tax payer funds?

PRIME MINISTER:  Well I always said there would be additional initiatives and there are in fact the Emissions Reduction Fund and the flagging of additional investment was set by Tony Abbott back in 2015 so this is a continuation of those programs and that is why I have always been so confident and why am I so confident because the 2020 targets we will exceed by over 400 million tonnes and when we came to Government we inherited a deficit of more than 700 million tonnes and we turned that around through these programs we will be one of the few countries in the world that will have exceeded our targets in 2020 by that type of amount well beyond many of the others who are often claimed and out to 2030 we have the plan to get us to hit those targets in a canter as well so our record speaks for itself we meet the targets that have been set for us that we have set ourselves and we will meet them in the future and they are sensible.

I mean a 45 per cent emissions reduction target as we learnt last week is going to cost everyone’s wages $9,000 a year, now that is a carbon tax on steroids. Remember that was $500 per year this is $9,000 per year and the reason for that is we have to hit 328 million tonnes to get to our 2030 target. Labor will require more than 3 times that amount shutting down industries around the country which will be terrible for our economy. Sensible, balanced that’s our approach with a track record of achieving.

KIERAN GILBERT: Prime Minister do you think that the wild weather that we have seen over recent months over Summer has made you know this an even more potent issue in the minds of people in the electorate. Is that your sense of the politics of this issue?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I mean I think that is absolutely a perception that is there and as I said at the Press Club a few weeks ago obviously these things play into this issue you know the extent of that currently I think that is a matter that is often debated but let’s understand where we are right now we are meeting and exceeding our carbon emission reduction targets that we set for ourselves right now.

So in terms for our action on climate change we are bettering what we said we would achieve and that means right now when these events are occurring we are well ahead of what people thought would be able to achieve and certainly what the Labor Party left us with which was a 700 million tonne deficit to meet our 2020 targets which we will now as I have said before smash more than 400 million tonnes.

JAYES: Well this climate solutions fund as you are calling it this morning, will it be used to underwrite new coal projects of which the government, your Government with Angus Taylor has identified ten?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s not what the Emissions Reduction Fund does, no.

JAYES: So there won’t be any funding from this to go to underwriting of new coal, that money will be found elsewhere and I imagine you will require legislation?

PRIME MINISTER: That is a separate process which continues to be underway which is agnostic about what the source of reliable energy is and that is a separate process. What I am talking about today is the Emissions Reduction Fund which is a $2 billion over the next ten years. This is also important, we are meeting our targets without having to go and purchase foreign carbon credits. Now in New Zealand I met with Jacinda Ardern last Friday and she told me that they are going to have to do that in New Zealand now in Australia we are not doing that. We are meeting our Emissions Reductions Targets, and lets remind ourselves is a reduction in per capita emissions by over 50 percent by 2030 and a reduction in the intensity of our emissions by two thirds now that stands up as credible anywhere in the world today and so they are credible targets but they are also sensible targets. Labor’s targets are reckless, I can’t describe it any other way and they will hit tax payers and they will hit industries and they will hit jobs and they will hit wages.

GILBERT: Well that is the debate you will obviously continue over coming months but did you concede this morning that $2 billion it’s a big figure this is a carbon price isn’t it of some sort on the economy and on tax payers.

PRIME MINISTER:  No, no, no this is an investment in programs … it’s in the Budget this is the point it’s in our Budget.

GILBERT: It’s a carbon price.

PRIME MINISTER: It’s fully funded, no it’s not I think with great respect Keiran it shows a misunderstanding of the issues what this is investing in practices whether it’s in farms, in businesses or in other places to adopt energy efficient and improving technologies and practices which result in a reduction in carbon emissions but they also result in an improvement in productivity.

GILBERT: But it’s not free that’s the point.

PRIME MINISTER: So everybody wins, everybody wins from this project it’s not a price it is an investment.

JAYES: Can I ask you about the latest Newspoll 47 out of 53 you are still six points behind after the last fortnight in Parliament are you disappointed that there hasn’t been some kind of improvement there?

PRIME MINISTER: I just focus on the plan we have, the plans that we have outlaid on the economy, our national security plans, the plans I’m announcing today to meet our climate change targets and that’s what we are putting to the Australian people. Now the only reference I would make to those numbers today clearly what we are saying on the economy and the national security is resonating when it comes to my plans and I welcome that.

JAYES: Where is the evidence of that Prime Minister with these numbers?

PRIME MINISTER: You must have missed the bit that showed the difference between Bill Shorten and I when it comes to the economy and national security, we are resonating when it comes to our economic message and our national security message. The election is in May, West Coast were behind at half time and there is still a long way to go.

GILBERT: Do you feel that you have misread the mood though somewhat on asylum seekers, in terms of medical evacuations as you say in terms of the polling you are up on national security you are up on border protection that’s fine but in terms of the primary vote it hasn’t budged. Are people more sympathetic than you might have expected?

PRIME MINISTER: Honestly guys, seriously you are focussing on the wrong things. What border protection is about is border protection it’s about ensuring you have an integrity of border protection that’s why we do what we do that’s why we have always done what we have done.

It’s not about these numbers you are talking about if you focus on those numbers then you do what Bill Shorten does every day and changes his position on Christmas Island I mean what is his position today it was different yesterday to what it was two days before that. He’s chasing the polls around what I am doing is laying out plans for our economy, national security, climate change and border protection and people will make their own judgement but what people know about me is when I make decisions, when I put plans in place I achieve them whether it is on border protection, the economy and indeed our Government has from the first time when we put the Emissions Reduction Fund in place, I mean that of itself has resulted in almost 200 million tonnes of carbon abatement over the course of our Government. Now these are real results so we are focussed on those results the policy results because that’s what impacts on the outcomes for every Australian.

JAYES: A few final things Prime Minister, why have you cancelled the dawn services at Villers-Bretonneux is there any chance of overturning that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that was a matter that I understand was decided by the Department and that has been brought to my attention and I will be discussing that with the Minister.

GILBERT: All right and so hopefully some change or potential change on that front and finally onto China and the coal issues do you think it is believable what they have said in relation to environmental checks for our coal given the standard of our exported coal is better than most of the rest of the world and yet exports from Indonesia, Russia are still going in to that port of Dalian in China is their reason believable?

PRIME MINISTER: Well this has happened before this is not the first time this has happened we have worked through these issues before these are local decisions that are made in these ports I should stress and they don’t represent a very large proportion of coal exports through that port into China in terms of our broader export of coal into China so we will just work through these issues as we have previously it’s not new and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in China has made it very clear that these two things are not related and we take that at their word but I do know this I don’t think a global market for coal being impacted negatively is a wonderful thing, the Labor Party does.

Everyone in Townsville should know everyone whose job depends on our biggest single minerals export, 55,000 of them should know that the Labor Party thinks that the market that supports your job not doing well is wonderful, that is an absolute disgrace. We believe in creating jobs and having sustainable industries we also believe in our traditional industries whether its forestries, whether is fisheries, whether it’s mining whether its agriculture. Yesterday I was in Gippsland talking to farmers in Gippsland who have been affected by the drought. As you know I have been up in Cloncurry in Julia Creek talking to those who have been affected by the floods we support our agriculture and primary industries and I was also in Tasmania the week before putting in place our forestry hub plan which is very important for jobs in north west Tasmania.

GILBERT: Prime Minister we appreciate your time thanks for that.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot Kieran, see you guys.

PAUL KENNEDY: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: G’Day.

KENNEDY: What is the difference between your Climate Solutions Fund and the Emissions Reduction Fund created by Tony Abbott?

PRIME MINISTER: It guess beyond the Emissions Reduction fund. So it is embracing many others projects as well.  But the Emissions Reduction Fund which Tony Abbott started has been a great success. I mean it has been responsible for about 200 million tonnes abatement and it was always our intention that we would need to extend that out to ensure we met our 2030 targets, which we will. The 2020 targets we will meet comfortably by around 367 million tonnes in addition to what our commitments was. Now let’s remember when we came to government we were inheriting a deficit on that of some 700 million tonnes. So that is a 1.1 billion tonne turn around and that program, which Tony started, and was followed through by Malcolm and now myself, has been very successful. So we are adding to the success of the project to meet those targets.

KENNEDY: When you are quoted as saying you will meet your targets in a canter, you were including this money? You had this in mind?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

KENNEDY: What is the difference for small business and farmers?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s continuing the projects that we already do. So it’s a reverse auction basically and what we’ve seen through this program is it does everything from improving soil productivity and boosting energy efficiency, assisting small businesses and their management practices. Savannah management practices and things like that for indigenous communities. It has been an incredibly successful program, both improving the economy and supporting the environment. So it has been a success and we’ll continue it.

KENNEDY: How will people in remote communities be able to hold off severe bushfires was one that (inaudible)?

PRIME MINISTER: They are already doing that in terms of how they manage their burn management programs and that is part of the reverse auction process.

KENNEDY:  Haven’t they have done for a long time?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah and this helps them continue to do that and provides an economic basis for doing so, supporting jobs in rural and regional communities, particularly for indigenous Australians, who know how to manage the land and we are backing in them on doing that.

KENNEDY: Now you are in Melbourne today to make this announcement. How much will the Victorian result from November, which climate change was a really big concern for voters, how much is that playing on your approach to climate change from now until the election?

PRIME MINISTER: I want to make some simple points.  Yes, we know of course we must address climate change and more importantly, we have been. We have been meeting our targets. We will meet those targets into the future and we have a plan to achieve that.  So when it comes to our climate …

KENNEDY:  If I can just jump in on that, from the Victorian election there was a lot of criticism and blow back from previous Liberal voters who did not vote for the Coalition in Victoria because of a lack of climate change policy.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think because of a lack of awareness of our climate change policy and I think ...

KENNEDY: It wasn't sold well.

PRIME MINISTER: What I’m saying today is we that we’ve got a very strong record of achievement. I was in New Zealand on Friday. New Zealand to meet their targets will have to buy foreign carbon credits. Under our plan we don't have to do that. We are actually achieving our abatement on our side of the line. And not only just achieving it, but we are bettering it. There are very few countries in the world that can claim a 367 million tonne better than 2020 on our targets. Our emissions reductions by 2030 will be more than 50% per person and they will be about a two-third reduction in emissions intensity by 2030. So these are serious targets but our targets are measured and balanced.

KENNEDY: Why not aim higher if things are going so well?

PRIME MINISTER: Well because it will crash the economy. It is not needed to have a higher target that will close industries and close jobs.

KENNEDY: So you won’t change your targets?

PRIME MINISTER: Labor's target at 45% would result in a loss of wages, per wage earner of $9,000 each per year. So you’ve got to have a responsible target that meets your environmental obligations, which we have been doing, but also supports our economy because our obligation to future generations is to give them a better planet, but it is also to ensure they have got an economy that supports their lifestyle.

KENNEDY: Just a couple more on the politics of this. Malcolm Turnbull said in his final press conference, that the truth is the Coalition finds it very hard to get agreement on anything to do with emissions, emissions issues and climate policy issues. Have the same problem within the Coalition of bitterly entrenched views, that are actually more Ideological than views based on engineering and economics. Are those views still entrenched?

PRIME MINISTER: This program has absolute support right across the party because it deals with things that Malcolm started also on Snowy 2.0 and we are picking up with the Marinus link with Tasmania.

KENNEDY: But are those views still entrenched in some parts?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think the proof is the policy I am announcing today. Because this is what matters.  What matters is what you get done and our record on addressing climate change is a very strong one and we have the plans in place to achieve our next set of targets which are responsible. So whether it is the Battery of the Nation, Snowy 2.0, the work that is being done in energy efficiency, the work that is being done on our Emissions Reduction Fund, all of that is adding up to meeting our obligations and our targets.

KENNEDY: Are you better at bringing the party together on this issue than Malcolm Turnbull, is that what you are saying?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I am saying we have a clear plan based on a great track record of which Malcolm Turnbull and Tony Abbott were key parts of putting together and driving that success.

KENNEDY: Newspoll is out today.  No big shift on those numbers. Are you surprised you that didn't get a bump following your attack on Labor on border protection?

PRIME MINISTER: No, because that was not what it is about. It was about … I mean people know many things about me but one thing I am sure they know is that when it comes to border protection I don't waiver, ever and that is why I took the strong position I did on this.  For that and that reason alone.

KENNEDY: Dr Katie Allen was pre-selected as we just mentioned in Higgins yesterday.

PRIME MINISTER: A tremendous candidate.

KENNEDY: Are you relieved given a woman was not pre-selected in Stirling.

PRIME MINISTER: Let's go to Stirling. We have Vince Connolly who is a veteran and I would be pleased to have another veteran who has served overseas for our defence forces. Three great kids.  Great family man. He is coming to join the Parliament and now we’ve got Katie who was pre-selected on the weekend. A paediatrician, a medical research scientist, a mother herself. I mean, she is an outstanding candidate as is Vince. So we are recruiting great talent to our team. It is about talent. It is about people who can come and bring their experience and credentials to my team and the fact we have got so many people signing up to our team, it gives me a great sense of confidence about the direction we are taking.

KENNEDY: But it is also about women. What is the great disadvantage of taking too few women in the Liberal Party ranks to the next election?

PRIME MINISTER: Since I became leader I think it is now 19 women that have now been selected in the both the Senate and in the House and Wendy has already joined us, taking over from David Bushby's position in Tasmania.

KENNEDY: So you are not concerned you have too few women?

PRIME MINISTER: Well what I am saying is since I have become Prime Minister the record of actually seeing women come into the ranks in very, very strong seats for the Liberal Party has been pretty good.

KENNEDY: A couple of quick ones to finish on. Labor has announced today a levy on banks. It is calling it the Banking Fairness Fund. So another fund there. Do you think it sound like a good idea?

PRIME MINISTER: The Labor Party's answer to every question. Bill Shorten’s answer to every question is higher taxes. So who is next? He has announced this today…

KENNEDY: It’s a levy on the banks to help people who are struggling in financial circumstances and can't get good advice and it is a follow from the Royal Commission, of course.

PRIME MINISTER: A good program should get support, but what we are able to do is fund Medicare to its highest rate of bulk-billing in history without it increasing people's taxes. We are able to have the highest funding for education. Increasing education funding for schools, independent and public and without increasing taxes. Bill Shorten doesn't seem to be able to do anything without increasing taxes. So its retirees, homeowners, wage earners, superannuation.  I mean they are all getting hit with Bill Shorten's tax stick. I mean that is the only stick he's got - a higher tax stick that he hits anybody, anybody who gets anywhere near him.

KENNEDY: Well ok, we will hear from the Opposition today about that issue. Just one final one, Ita Buttrose as the chair of the ABC. Would you give that the green light when it is presented to Cabinet?

PRIME MINISTER: Cabinet hasn't made a decision on this matter yet and we are considering these matters and when we have made a decision we will make an announcement.

KENNEDY: Do you think she would she be a good person for the job?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't get into commentary about things that Cabinet are considering. Do you think she would?

KENNEDY: We have been pretty positive in the newsroom this morning about Ita Buttrose being the chair of the ABC.

PRIME MINISTER: I have known Ita for a long time …

KENNEDY: But it’s not up to me, it’s a question for you

PRIME MINISTER: … and I think she's an extraordinary Australian. An Australian of the Year and there  have been few people more than Ita that I think have lifted the standards of journalism in this country and I think that says a lot about her character and her abilities.

KENNEDY: Joining the ranks of the great journalism of the ABC, it would be a nice fit, it seems. Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day David.

INTERVIEWER: Given this poll out today, are you disappointed with that, that you haven’t had a bounce in the polls? Because you made a big thing of the difference between your policy and also the Opposition’s in terms of Medivac and asylum seeker boats.

PRIME MINISTER: We stand by all of that because that was about the policy. We don’t want to see Australia’s border protection policy weakened and that's why we took the step we did. The polls will be the polls. West Coast was behind at half time too, David, as you’ll recall. So the hooter goes in May, at the end of the session. And so we’re focused on whether is our stronger economy plans, our stronger national security plans, and today of course, outlining how we will meet our 2030 emissions reductions target through the Climate Solutions Fund.

INTERVIEWER: So you honestly think you can win the next election?

PRIME MINISTER: Of course I do.

INTERVIEWER: Is it right Bill Shorten has written to you advising the Opposition front bench will be having meeting with senior public servants in the next couple of weeks to ensure a smooth transition of power?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I know that… yes, that have, they tried the same thing back in 2016. They are getting ahead of themselves. The hubris we’ve seen from Bill Shorten thinking he has already won an election I think has risen to new levels. We will follow all the normal protocols that are associated with elections and he is trying to actually over-assert what his entitlements are in this area. But that is because he is overconfident about the next election and is approaching it, I think, quite arrogantly.

INTERVIEWER: Australians though are seeing all of these colleagues of yours resigning, Julie Bishop the latest one. A lot of women resigning from the Party. A lot of Australians are thinking wow, have they have seen the writing on the wall? Are they are getting out early and getting new jobs before the inevitable?

PRIME MINISTER: No and Julie Bishop said exactly the opposite, as did Kelly O'Dwyer. And yesterday, we preselected Dr Katie Allen. She is a paediatrician who is also a medical research scientist working on children's health. Her victory yesterday, a very substantial one in the seat of Higgins, I think demonstrates the vote of confidence that people of real talent, women of real talent, are putting in the Liberal Party. And so they are joining our team, just as many others have been to take up these positions and in fact the retirements are no different than what happens at most elections, David. They’re consistent with that and Labor have had many women retire as well.

INTERVIEWER: But you are, you have got to admit, you are pretty short on women in your ranks. Are you looking at bringing in quotas? How are you going to rectify that, because it is not a great look.

PRIME MINISTER: Well since I became Prime Minister, we’ve has I think now 19 women selected in key roles. Whether it’s Bridget Archer down there in the seat of Bass or Jess Whelan in the seat of Lyons. We have got women coming in to the Senate replacing men who have gone out of the Senate, so we’ve seen quite a number come in over these last few months. But it is certainly an issue the Party will need to address in the future, but I’m pleased at the number of women who have stepped forward in the last six months to take on these roles, and they are high-quality and they are great candidates and they are there absolutely on merit.

INTERVIEWER: OK. Let’s talk about climate change. You're unveiling your plan to tackle climate change today, including allocating $2 billion over ten years for practical solutions to reducing emissions and making sure we meet our Paris Agreement target in 2030. You can understand people get a bit confused about the Coalition’s climate change policy. Are you a climate change believer?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Three things. First of all, we owe it to future generations to address this issue, and we have been addressing this issue. Our record, when we came into government, we had to make up for a 700 million tonne deficit on carbon emissions when we came to government. The policies we have put in place to meet our 2020 targets means we will now beat that by 400 million tonnes. The policies we have put in place are working, they are hitting our targets. There are very few countries in the world that can say that they will not only meet our 2020 targets but exceed them.

INTERVIEWER: So why are you spending an extra $2 billion if you are reaching the target comfortably? Are you going to set new lower targets?

PRIME MINISTER: No, the 2020 targets are the one we're going to meet by over 400 million tonnes. The 2030 targets will require this additional investment in the very programs that have been…

INTERVIEWER: So you are a bit behind on that?

PRIME MINISTER: No, no, we always knew that there would be more that needed to be done and I have said that on several occasions and I said we’d be announcing that before the election. And today, I’m making those plans clear. These are responsible targets, David. I believe that you can meet your emissions reduction targets, address climate change and not put a sledgehammer through your economy. That is why our targets are balanced. They will reduce per capita emissions by more than 50 per cent by 2030 and our emissions intensity by two thirds. Now, that is one of the best targets in the G20. Countries like Canada won't meet that. Countries like New Zealand will not meet that same level of result and they will have to buy carbon credits from overseas. We are dealing with it on our side of the line, making sure we are taking the action that is needed.

INTERVIEWER: So this Climate Solutions Fund is the renamed the Emissions Reduction Fund?

PRIME MINISTER: No it’s more than that, because there is the work being done on Emissions Reduction Fund, there is the investment that will be going into Snowy Hydro 2.0 and also the Battery of the Nation project, another pumped hydro very significant project in Tasmania. It also deals with electric car strategy and on top of that, continuing with the energy efficiency measures whether it's in households or businesses. So it’s a comprehensive package.

INTERVIEWER: It sounds like you like renewables and renewable energy has a real place in this?

PRIME MINISTER: Well of course it does. So does reliable energy. I mean, I don’t… as my predecessor used to say, these things don't have moral qualities, they just produce energy that people need to use, so I don't get hung up on personal affections for one or the other.

INTERVIEWER: Your colleagues slammed South Australia for their batteries and renewable energies.

PRIME MINISTER: I just want stuff that works, David. That’s what I want to do. My plan will do that, it’ll meet our targets and it won’t put a sledge hammer through our economy. Labor's emissions reduction target of 45 per cent will cost everybody's wage $9,000 a year. $9,000 a year. That's a carbon tax on steroids.

INTERVIEWER: OK, Prime Minister, thank you for talking to us this morning. Appreciate it.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks David, good to be with you.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison joins us now from Melbourne, good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Deb.

INTERVIEWER: Now you’ve gone in hard over the past fortnight to try and discredit Labor on border protection. This Newspoll though shows things haven’t shifted. Why do you think your message isn’t cutting through?

PRIME MINISTER: We’re just doing the right thing for Australia’s borders. That's why we are doing this. We have always been strong on this issue, and I take great issue, whether it is the Labor Party, the Greens or anyone else, who want to undermine the strong border protection that we have put in place. That's why I acted on it, Deb, and that's why I will always act on it.

INTERVIEWER: You have been accused of scaremongering on this issue. Do you think that that’s not cutting with voters?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I know what the accusations are. I was accused of that when the boats were turning up thick and fast when we were in Opposition and people said I wouldn't be able to, as a team, turn it around. But we did. So that was an important thing for us to do as a nation. So I don't get swayed by those sort of criticisms. I just do what's right for the country and what’s right for our borders.

INTERVIEWER: Now, you are taking the fight to Labor on the issue of climate and your Party we know has been tearing itself apart on this for years. It has brought down leaders on both sides of politics. How do you come up with a united policy on climate change when some within your own ranks appear to doubt that it is even real?

PRIME MINISTER: We have one and we have been achieving it is. It is a right thing to do for future generations. The plan that we have been working to has taken where we inherited a 700 million tonne deficit on carbon emissions for the 2020 targets and we are now going to beat that by more than 400 million tonnes. And the core of that success has been the Emissions Reduction Fund and we are putting more money into that over the next decade to meet our 2030 targets. But it is not just that, it’s the work we are doing on hydro, whether it is Snowy Hydro 2.0 or down in Tasmania with the Battery of the Nation project where I was last year with Will Hodgman and I met with him again this week and we have been working on how we can bring that project to life.

And all the work that has been done on energy efficiency, whether it is on people's roofs or within their businesses, this is what will get us to the 2030 target. And what I'm announcing today will make sure that we can do that. We are already over achieving on our targets and with our plan we will continue to meet those targets which is what matters at the end of the day. Are you getting the job done? And when it comes to climate we are getting the job done on the targets that have been set and they are responsible targets as well as real and credible targets.

INTERVIEWER: Because I guess that would make people why we need to spend another $2 billion to get there, because you have said in the past as you have said now we will meet those Paris targets by 2030, and you used the language in a canter, so why do we need to do this spending?

PRIME MINISTER: And we will, Deb. Deb, I always knew we were going to put these policies in place and I was very clear about that all the way through and these are the policies that will continue to get us there in 2030. And they are built on the success of what we have achieved to date and they carry that success through to make sure we can achieve it by 2030. Now, we won't be do it by buying foreign carbon credits using taxpayer's money. Other countries will be doing that. New Zealand just confirmed to me last Friday that's what they will have to do. We will be reducing our missions on our side of the line, but we’ll be doing it without putting a wrecking ball through the Australian economy. I mean, Labor's 45 per cent emissions reduction target will cost everyone’s wage $9,000 a year. That's what the independent assessment came out and said last week. That's a carbon tax on steroids. We won't be doing that. Our target reduces the intensity of emissions by two thirds by 2030 and emissions per capita by over 50 per cent. We will achieve all of that. We will be doing our bit but keeping the economy strong at the same time.

INTERVIEWER: We know how crucial credibility and authenticity is in politics and you were the Treasurer who came into Question Time with a lump of coal talking up fossil fuels. I guess the big question for voters is how can they trust you to turn things around on climate policy?

PRIME MINISTER: Because our policies have been working. We need to draw our energy from all sources, Deb, all sources. And we need reliable power, as well as renewable, and in many cases, like with hydro, it is both and that's why we are investing in those areas. But I'm not going to join the Labor Party who sees the global market for our biggest mineral export facing some real problems as being wonderful. The Labor Party has said to 55,000 people who work in the coal industry that your jobs don't mean anything to us. Now, I know that would be a terrible message for people to hear up in Townsville. They are already dealing with the floods, and now they have got a Labor Party who wants to take their jobs away.

INTERVIEWER: All right, Prime Minister, time is unfortunately against us as always. There is lots more to talk to you about. But we hope to have you back on the show again soon. We thank you for your time this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks, Deb.

INTERVIEWER:: Prime Minister Scott Morrison, good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Neil, good to be with you. I’m sorry we couldn’t catch up the other day.  

INTERVIEWER:: Thank you, I understand you were ill. Thank you for your time. This cyberattack - the head of ASIO says it's an unprecedented threat, the damage will last for years. Can you rule out China as the main suspect?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm not commenting on where it might come from other than to say the sophistication, as I said in the Parliament yesterday, has led agencies to advise that this is a state actor but I'm not...

INTERVIEWER:: What does that mean, what’s a state actor?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it means it’s a government. But we're not in any position to attribute that to any particular nation.

INTERVIEWER:: So we don't know who did it.

PRIME MINISTER: We're not in a position to do that.

INTERVIEWER:: Sorry but who do you know who did it or not?

PRIME MINISTER: No what I'm saying is you don't go and make those claims wildly.

INTERVIEWER:: I'm not asking you to say.

PRIME MINISTER: I'm not suggesting you are. So we don't have any information, I don't have any information that would enable me to make that claim.

INTERVIEWER:: So you don't know who did it?

PRIME MINISTER: I've said what I've said, Neil. That's a very specific wording I've used.

INTERVIEWER:: Well clearly you've got suspicions.

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's not up to me to have suspicions and share them, it's up to me to to speak to the facts as we know them and what we can be very confident of.  

INTERVIEWER:: Can you give us a list of likely suspects?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER:: China says media speculation on this is heightening tensions between the two countries, is that right?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm not responsible for the media.

INTERVIEWER:: No, no, but are tensions being heightened? Are tensions with China heightened?

PRIME MINISTER: We work constructively with China. I've met with [inaudible] as well as the President and we have a very important relationship with China and I'm very positive about particularly the economic growth of China. I mean, there's some suggestion that Western countries don't want to see and want to frustrate China's growth. We don't share that view. We want to see China do well. I've just been down in Melbourne recently for, you know, Chinese New Year celebrations. I think this is one of the key points - we celebrate their prosperity. And you know we've got one point two million Australians of Chinese heritage in Australia. And we celebrate those links and they’re positive.

INTERVIEWER:: Prime Minister, I take from what you said that you've got a fair idea who's responsible and you don't want to say it, is that right?

PRIME MINISTER:  I'm not going to get into a discussion on security matters.

INTERVIEWER:: But once it is established, will you make it public?

PRIME MINISTER: Well again, whatever we might say would be a matter that I would consult with the National Security Committee of Cabinet.  

INTERVIEWER:: Fair enough. What… what have they got on us? Whoever did it and whoever did it, what information they got now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well yesterday Alastair MacGibbon I think sort of went into that and it's not clear what the precise purpose of this is at this stage. But those investigations continue and there is no suggestion that there is any, any at this point, any greater access to information.  But these things are concerning, as I said yesterday...

INTERVIEWER:: If they've hacked in, there must be access to information.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I mean, people can make all sorts of suppositions. But I've just deal with the information that I have.

INTERVIEWER:: Is there any is there any evidence or suggestion that could have been an attempt to interfere with our democratic process?

PRIME MINISTER: No, and I said that. There's no evidence to suggest that at this point.

INTERVIEWER:: Why else would you be hacking into the Parliament?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that’s supposition, that’s speculation. And what I said in the Parliament yesterday… see, as Prime Minister I've got to stay on the facts

INTERVIEWER:: I understand, I understand.

PRIME MINISTER: The facts say that there is there is no evidence of that. But clearly one of the general areas of risk, not specific to what I'm, you know, I've identified in the Parliament yesterday is that we need to make sure Australia is protected from this. This is why we introduced the foreign interference laws into the Parliament and...

INTERVIEWER:: But wasn't there a warning to upgrade the system in 2015, three or four years ago?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we did and have been.

INTERVIEWER:: The political parties as well?

PRIME MINISTER: The political parties do this under their own steam, just like any company or business does. And that's why all all businesses, all political organizations. You know, even 3AW’s website and systems. I mean, everybody is responsible for their own security on their own sites just like they are for protecting their own home. 

INTERVIEWER:: But would I be correct in saying the area that's been hacked has a lot of personal details and on a lot of voters?

PRIME MINISTER: That's not clear. I've heard that being suggested, but there's nothing to suggest, at least in front of me, that has occurred.

INTERVIEWER:: So it's possible, we don't really know.

PRIME MINISTER: Well anything's possible but that doesn’t mean it happened.

INTERVIEWER:: OK. Border protection. Isn't the problem that you've been campaigning about and saying the weakening of the borders, isn't that fixed now? Nauru's tightened the laws.

PRIME MINISTER: Well what Labor did last week was weaken them.

INTERVIEWER:: But hasn't Nauru fixed it now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's not quite clear what they've done and how that will play out. I think what's happened in Nauru is a good example of what happens and how Labor didn’t think through what playing around with border protection laws will do. I mean, there are consequences.

INTERVIEWER:: The reports are in Nauru though, limited medical evacuations and stopped remote assessment by doctors. Is that right?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm still getting reports in of exactly what they've decided to do and what the legal force of that is.  But look that's a matter for them and it's a reminder that it's their country.

INTERVIEWER:: But if they have done that, it certainly reinforces the strength and undermines your argument that it's weakened, doesn’t it? If they have done that?

PRIME MINISTER: What Labor did was weaken our border protection.

INTERVIEWER:: And now Nauru has tightened it again.

PRIME MINISTER: Well what Nauru has indeed done and, that it is legally able to be done, well we’ll make our assessment on that. But there's no leave pass here for Labor. Labor weakened the border protection laws last week wilfully, wilfully.

INTERVIEWER:: ASIO also says the leak on their advice was incorrect and you were in part using that leak publicly to convince us the boats were coming. Are the boats still coming?

PRIME MINISTER: They were always at risk of coming. That never changes.

INTERVIEWER::  But are the increased risks still there?

PRIME MINISTER: Of course there is. There's always that. When you weaken the border protection laws, as was said last night by Mike Pezzullo the Secretary of the Department of Home Affairs, that always increases risk. Now I have taken actions on the advice of these agencies, particularly Home Affairs, to take a number of step which has included the reopening of Christmas Island, which was recommend to us by the Secretary of Home Affair. And to strengthen what we were doing with Operation Sovereign Borders and that included everything from our strategic communications through to posturing in terms of where our assets are and what they're doing and that's what we’ve done.  We had to strengthen it because Labor weakened it.

INTERVIEWER:: Is it correct the US has refused entry to 265 people from Nauru who wanted to go there?

PRIME MINISTER: They were always not going to accept everybody, that's their own.

INTERVIEWER:: And why have they rejected them?

PRIME MINISTER: Well for reasons that would suggest that they weren't welcome in the United States because they'd be concerned about who they were.  

INTERVIEWER:: So what, matters of security?

PRIME MINISTER: They’re matters for the US and not for me to comment on.

INTERVIEWER:: But I mean I'm worried that the situation. The US could say these 265 people are not coming here but do they end up in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: Well not under our laws, but they can under Labor's.

INTERVIEWER:: So under these changes they could still come to Australia? Rejected by the US for security reasons, you’d assume.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s exactly right and this is the point we're making. Because in a lot of these cases, these people they won't have serious criminal convictions. But they may well be facing charges for such convictions and not have been sentenced and what Labor did to the laws means there is no ability for us to stop those transfers. The other group, Neil, is the group that have been found not to be refugees.

So they're there because they refused to go home. They're not refugees, they’re living in the community in Nauru and they can also be brought to Australia where they can, you know, engage the court process and play the system like always happens.

INTERVIEWER:: Prime Minister, I know you short for time.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh no, we’re good, we’re good.

INTERVIEWER:: Oh good. Why should we trust Border Force? I mean, they have mucked up this footballer, Hakeem al-Araibi. He spent two months in jail in Thailand because some bloke forgot to send an e-mail. Told him it was OK to travel there. At the very least he's owed a pretty serious apology isn't he?

PRIME MINISTER: Well you know I'll be taking that up with Border Force. There had been a review into these matters internally. But it was my job to get him home and I'm very pleased that Hakeem has come home, and it was great to meet him and his wife recently in Canberra.

INTERVIEWER:: But he wouldn't have been there of Border Force had done their job properly.

PRIME MINISTER: No I don't... I think that is actually a bit of a leap, Neil. There are many other ways that Hakeem would have been kept in (inaudible) other than just that incident. But I'm not suggesting that incident was not something that needs to be addressed. But it would be wrong to assume that other than for that that wouldn't have occurred. I don't think that’s correct.

INTERVIEWER:: A couple of minutes prior, are you happy Mathias Cormann, your Finance Minister, took a junket, free tickets for a family holiday from a company that had just won a billion dollar contract? Is that… it doesn’t look good.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that is not what happened.

INTERVIEWER:: But he did he take free tickets, didn’t he?

PRIME MINISTER: Well no he didn't. He thought he was paying for them.

INTERVIEWER:: Who paid for them?

PRIME MINISTER: He has paid.

INTERVIEWER:: He has after he got caught.

PRIME MINISTER:  Because he wasn't aware. He wasn't aware.

INTERVIEWER:: He wasn't aware and he wasn't paying for the tickets?

PRIME MINISTER: No that's the statement that he's made and he had nothing to do with the issuing of the contract, by the way, that had been issued prior and Ministers aren’t involved in those decisions. There's a clear separation that minister… any suggestion that the two were linked would be complete rubbish.

INTERVIEWER:: Bit it is not a good look, though.

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's why he's cleaned it up.

INTERVIEWER:: After. I've just robbed a bank but I'll give the money back.

PRIME MINISTER: No I think that's a bit unfair to put it in those terms.

INTERVIEWER:: It probably is.

PRIME MINISTER: There was that oversight which had been identified and he fixed it up. I mean what more can he do?

INTERVIEWER:: He could not have taken the free tickets in the first place.

PRIME MINISTER: But he didn't take free tickets in the first place.

INTERVIEWER:: Well they paid for his tickets.

PRIME MINISTER: He was fully… they were going to bill him and he didn’t get billed and that was drawn to his attention he paid the bill.  

INTERVIEWER:: Well what about another case, a former Minister and a Minister Michael Keenan and Michaelia Cash refusing to cooperate with the police investigation. That's outrageous.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s not true.

INTERVIEWER:: Did they refuse to give an interview?

PRIME MINISTER: They were written to and they were asked to respond which they did and they provided responses and the police have not sought any further statement from them. So they have cooperated.

INTERVIEWER:: It's reported today they refused to give statements to federal police, is that right?

PRIME MINISTER: They provided a response and the police have accepted that response and they haven't sought any I'm advised, any further statement.

INTERVIEWER:: So the police didn't want a statement, so they...

PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm just saying that cooperate with the investigation and nothing's been sought from them. And remember what this is about. This is about the alleged…

INTERVIEWER:: A political leak.

PRIME MINISTER: Misuse of union funds by the AWU, Bill Shorten’s union. There was a raid because the police believe they were destroying evidence that may have suggested that the Shorten’s union was sending money, allegedly, to GetUp! and even to his own benefit. So that's what this is about. So Bill Shorten should cooperate and actually provide the minutes of meetings and the other things that are necessary for the police to do their investigation. I think he's the one with the questions to answer and obviously to be cooperating.

INTERVIEWER:: Well I thought everybody should cooperate. You would hope, that didn’t happen here in Victoria.

PRIME MINISTER: They should, you’re dead right Neil. People should cooperate with police investigations and my Ministers have.

INTERVIEWER:: OK speaking just quickly of Victoria, a three billion dollar cheque you us for a road down here. Are we going to get it?

PRIME MINISTER: I will continue to work with the Victorian government. Let's just be very clear. What there is, is a contingent liability in in the Budget. What does that mean? That means if the state government had chosen to trigger investment in the East West Link, then the Commonwealth would have raised that money to support that project. So it's not like there's three billion dollars sitting actually there to spend on the road. That money would have to be added to the bottom line of the Budget and that would have to be allocated, so it would have to be new money. But I can tell you, we've already put in the last Budget there was over seven billion dollars we invested in Victorian infrastructure, we’re investing in busting infrastructure all over Melbourne and I'm keen to do more and I'm keen to work with the Victorian Government to achieve that. And we've got a Budget coming up in April and we'll have a bit more to say that then.

INTERVIEWER:: Prime Minister, you've come back in the polls. Is that the message you're getting from the ground, you’re back in the fight?

PRIME MINISTER: Look all I've been doing Neil is [inaudible], showing Australians what our record is on national security, on the economy and that's what guarantees essential services. People I'm finding when I when I'm relating this to them, are responding well. I think they're focusing very much on the future and what it all means for them. I think, you know, the Canberra Bubble and all the noise here which people go on to, they're telling me very clearly that they're not interested in, there interested in what's going ahead in the future to the extent that is being well received, I welcome it.  

INTERVIEWER:: I assume you're confident about being re-elected.

PRIME MINISTER: Of course. I mean, I didn't take the job on to, you know, to do anything else but that. I took the job one because I believed it was essential that the Liberal and National parties will return to this next election because the Labor Party will change it all. The retirees tax, the housing taxes, busting the borders - all of this, Labor will change it all.

INTERVIEWER:: If you are re-elected, given the history of the party in recent years, can you guarantee to stay Prime Minister for three years?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes.

INTERVIEWER:: How?

PRIME MINISTER: Because our party resolved that last year. An elected Liberal Prime Minister will now have the security of that arrangement over the next term. That's what we saw last year.  

INTERVIEWER:: Well if you’re not re-elected do you want to be opposition leader?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm not contemplating that situation. I'm contemplating being re-elected and ensuring that we continue to keep Australia safe, secure borders, and keep our economy strong.  

INTERVIEWER:: Well they’re both hypothetical

PRIME MINISTER: Not in my mind. I’m dealing with the reality. You know me, Neil. I’ll leave nothing on the field.

INTERVIEWER:: So what emoji are you going to put on your number plate?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh a big smiley face, mate. A big smiley face. You know me, I’m that cheery. How about you? I'd love to know what yours is.

INTERVIEWER:: Might be grumpy.

[Laughter]

Thank you for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you Neil, cheers mate.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Alan.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for your time. Could I just begin by saying that politicians rarely get praise. I have been speaking to farmers during the course of the weekend. You went to Julia Creek. They asked me if I'd thank you for going there. They believe you should know that you were fair dinkum and compassionate, and they wanted to say thank you because that opportunity isn't available to them. Can I just ask you, having been there and witnessed this devastation to listen, you're talking to people all over Australia. What was your reaction?

PRIME MINISTER: It was heartbreaking. It was devastating, not just there but also over Cloncurry. In both places and talking to a lot of the graziers, the property owners and other small business owners, the trucking companies. This is devastating, personally to families but also obviously the local economy. Obviously we're going to have to play a very big role in rebuilding the cattle industry in North Queensland. I can't imagine Australia without a cattle industry in North Queensland, it's not the same place. That’s basically what I said, it's a way of life, but it's also intrinsic to the success.

INTERVIEWER: It's the fourth biggest export market.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah it is just … so we're there, that's the commitment I made. The reconstruction effort, it’s going to be significant and it's going to take a long time. It's not, you know, an announcement today or next week, it's the next two, five, ten years.

INTERVIEWER: Can I come to that in a moment, just on basically what you saw. I mean, how long did they tell you… I know the military have got about 150 personnel on the ground. My own view from talking to people is that - I don't know how many people you can have on the ground - it wouldn't be enough. I mean how long did they tell you it would take to clean up? This is all they will be talking about at this hour of the morning; bloated animals which are littering the landscape. I mean there are kangaroos as well as cattle, 30,000 sheep. The infrastructure has been wrecked. The Flinders Highway east of Julia Creek is still cut as I said last night. There were travelers and trucks stranded. The railway track from Mount Isa to Townsville was completely buckled. How does Mount Isa get its copper, lead and zinc for export to Townsville? These are massive logistical problems.

PRIME MINISTER: They all are. Look, the way I'm looking at it, there's three stages to this. The first stage is the immediate response and that's everything from mental health support to immediate cash assistance too. Just the physical, immediate response. That's been underway now as you know, with Brigadier Jobson and the $1 million we've put into each of the councils, the $75,000 that’s going to reach the producers. That’s just to deal with the most immediate reaction to what is happening there.

The second stage is really doing what you've just mentioned. It's the rail line, it's the road, it's the disposal plan that is now being enacted up there to remove the carcasses, to have them buried safely. Now, what the station owners, what the producers told me is they very much want to control that process.

INTERVIEWER: Yes, they don't want the councils. They're worried about the council, it’s separate from the graziers.

PRIME MINISTER: They're supporting them in it but they just don't want, you know, people just stomping all over their properties. They know how to do this, they're getting the support through both the safety equipment and the protective gear, which you need because I tell you, you smell this stuff long before you see it and it has to be done.

INTERVIEWER: And it stays with you.

PRIME MINISTER: The Queensland Government is working with us on that. The military are directly involved. But also I've got to say the mining industry up there, Glencore in particular, have been fantastic with their help. Because their equipment that they have there, their heavy equipment is suited for those conditions. So they are marshalling all of the heavy equipment they have up in that region to support that role of disposal and they're focusing on things like clearing the Flinders and Landsborough Highways. That's as important for morale as it is for safety and getting these carcass out of the way. But Alan, they still don't know the extent of the losses. I mean, I was on one station and they hadn't been able to venture too far out from the homestead because of where the waters had been and so they were guessing. They were -

INTERVIEWER: There’s still an area the size of England underwater. There’s still an area the size of England underwater.

PRIME MINISTER: There’s an inland sea. I saw it was making its way down through the Gulf. So you know, this is a long way from over in terms of the immediate impact. But the third phase of course is there is the reconstruction and what I was incredibly impressed by, was the will to rebuild. A mate of yours, you know Phillip, I spoke to Phillip at the Gannons Hotel in Julia Creek. I thought he put it best; “We don't want people -

INTERVIEWER: Just stop there for a minute, just stop there for one minute. There’s a lot of people out there that know this bloke, Scott Morrison. He's brand new on the block. New Prime Minister, people don't know about him now. I - and I can tell them this - I texted the Prime Minister on Friday to just say; “Look, there's a farmer up there who really would like to say something to you. If you get the chance at Julia Creek, could you see him?” And I sent the mobile number. The Prime Minister rang the farmer, which to the farmer was virtually like, you know, God arriving, that someone of his status would ring. Rang the farmer, had a beer with him, stuck a cap on. Scott Morrison, you have no idea what that meant to those people there.

PRIME MINISTER: Well they were very encouraged and it's great to be able to do that as a Prime Minister. Because what they really want is the plan to go forward.

INTERVIEWER: They do.

PRIME MINISTER: They want to rebuild and they know it's not going to be easy. And it's different station by station, Alan. I mean, you can't just drop a whole bunch of cash from the sky on this thing. That's not going to work. What they need is a reconstruction plan, property by property by property, because they're all different. I mean, one of the stations I went to that is basically the top of the breeding cycle for Australia's herd. They have been genetically, you know, supporting their herd up there for generations now. You can't just go and buy cattle from the Northern Territory to replace those. They took generations to breed in and that's going to take a lot of time. So the value of those cattle is extremely high. You've got others which is at the other end. So every case is different. Their debt is structured differently. Their capacity to borrow is different. Some have lost 30 some have lost 95 per cent.

INTERVIEWER: You said you'd cut red tape so that small business operators – this is at the bottom end of the market - could get $25,000 disaster relief payments. Philip Alexander, the supermarket owner, told you that no one fitted into the category and he said I can't handle this paperwork. You said leave the paperwork to me. What does that mean?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it means I'm working on that now. One of the things I brought back - I'm going to be working Michaelia Cash and the Queensland Government over the course of this week - my first priority was to sort out the paperwork on the $75,000 for the producers, for the graziers. We got that sorted before I even got up there on Thursday night and that was well received, I can tell you, at the Cloncurry Bowling Club. I'm pretty happy about that. So now we need to apply ourselves to sorting out how that's going to work for the small business owners. I've got to say, in Cloncurry it was a bit better than Julia Creek. In Julia Creek, they really were hit very hard there. Because I mean, over at Cloncurry, you've also got the Henry mine so you've got you know the mining sector there as well. It's a bit more divers. But for some of these other smaller towns it's all about the cattle industry.

INTERVIEWER: Can I just raise this with you - and I wrote to you about this - but you have said quite a few times since Friday, you've talked about a 10 year rescue plan. PM, many of these people won't be here in 10 years. I was asking you on behalf of the farmers, whether the Cabinet would consider giving a 100 per cent compensation for losses, so that the farmers and the businesses can immediately continue to employ - because those employed continue to pay taxes and they won’t go onto welfare which will cost the taxpayer a fortune - can build the infrastructure, the roads and railways lines, the fences and the sheds and can buy materials and work from the locals which will rebuild the community and the families together.

I hate to inject a negative point in here, but they keep saying to me that there wasn't a 10 year plan to give $444 million dollars to the Great Barrier Reef Foundation.

PRIME MINISTER: Well they’re completely different things. I mean the Great Barrier Reef Foundation that's money to actually apply over that period of time Alan and it's being done through one organization, so that wasn’t just today, that was for many, many years to come. So I think with respect, the two things are quite different.

INTERVIEWER: Okay well what do you say –

PRIME MINISTER: What we’re talking about here, up in north Queensland

INTERVIEWER: They’ve got no money, no income.

PRIME MINISTER: I understand that and this will cost hundreds of millions of dollars if not more.

INTERVIEWER: It will, it will.

PRIME MINISTER: It's going to require a reconstruction plan, property by property. It's going to require dealing with existing debt. It's going to have to deal with future debt. It's going to have to deal with subsidies for how you rebuild your stock. So this is what we're putting in place.

INTERVIEWER: But you see, the date today Scott, the date today Prime Minister, is the 18th February 18. Come March 1 the mortgage payments due.

PRIME MINISTER: No but they won't be Alan. That's the thing, the banks are already –

INTERVIEWER: But for the workers, it’s due for the worker as well, it's due for the small businessman in Townsville.

PRIME MINISTER: Exactly and that's why we'll work on those 25,000 payments and their extension. That's why we've put the 1 million bucks into every single council.

INTERVIEWER: Where does the money come from, to go out and buy the fence posts, to be able to start fencing hundreds of miles that have been destroyed?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's what we'll do, property by property by property. One thing I'm not going to do is rush to failure on this. I am acutely aware of the urgency. I've spoken to people directly about it on the ground and as Phil said to me in the pub of the Gannons Hotel he said; “What we want is reconstruction not compensation”. So they want us to partner with them to rebuild every single one of these stations. It’s my plan for them all to be there in 10 years and I'm going to do that working with every individual station.

INTERVIEWER: Okay just a couple of things before you go. Kerryn Phelps has been in Parliament for five minutes, we now face 2008 revisited, when Labor abolished the Pacific solution.

PRIME MINISTER: And temporary protection visas.

INTERVIEWER: And temporary protection visas. That cost us 16 billion dollars. Now, where do you think we stand, in a realistic sense in relation to this, what is your intelligence telling you now - Home Affairs, security, ASIO, all these people and your contacts in Indonesia - about boat people?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it says we need to firm up Operation Sovereign Borders, which is exactly what I did the day after, and on the day of the vote I convened the National Security Committee. We put those measures in place. We've engaged in direct messaging into the region that, you know, that may have happened, but frankly I'm still here, Peter Dutton is still here, the Government is still here, the one that stopped the boats and we won't let you in.

I mean I didn't want to have to reopen the Christmas Island detention centre a week ago, I didn't have to. I do today and that's going to cost about half a billion dollars.

INTERVIEWER: That was recommended to you by Home Affairs.

PRIME MINISTER: By Home Affairs, exactly. So you've got the Labor Party out there saying; “Oh, we will always follow the advice of agencies on this”. Yet they're describing the decision to reopen Christmas Island as ridiculous.

INTERVIEWER: What is the problem with Nauru? I don't understand what the problem with Manus is, I mean there’s 64 professionals there, half of them are doctors.

PRIME MINISTER: If you had anywhere in Australia the ratio of medical professionals to people –

INTERVIEWER: One to seven?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah one to seven and 14 – 1 for mental health services. I mean, there's nowhere in the country to my knowledge that that's it's that concentrated, not even in Wentworth for goodness sake with the number of doctors they have there.

INTERVIEWER: You should open a detention centre there. What's the point of going to the polls, if in fact migration policy and refugee policy is going to be determined by doctors?

PRIME MINISTER: That's what Labor have done. That's exactly what they have done, taking it away. But you're right the medical professionals are there. The children are off. So what this is about - let's make no mistake - is about shutting down offshore processing. That's what it's about. That's what Labor voted for. They did it with their eyes wide open. They had the declassified advice and the classified briefings from ASIO and from the head of the Defence Force and the head of Home Affairs and Sovereign Borders. And when we'd gone and implemented that advice, they said; “Oh what did you have to do that for?” Well, we told you what was going to have to happen if you voted for that bill. He has decided to take a cheap vote in Canberra to play to the Canberra bubble, rather than understand that Australians expect political leaders to stand up for border protection, which is what I’ve always done.

INTERVIEWER: I will just confirm, you already have, sorry - it was last week, before this rubbish was passed – a Transitory Persons Committee don't you? I think within the Department of Home Affairs and they meet once a month?

PRIME MINISTER: Medical professionals.

INTERVIEWER: That’s right, they assess the needs and seek urgent medical care, the mechanism is in place and there have been transfers from the Papua New Guinea or Nauru since July 2016.

PRIME MINISTER: There have.

INTERVIEWER: That's already being done. So basically, this is a heap of humbug.

PRIME MINISTER:  They sought to solve a problem that didn't exist.

INTERVIEWER: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: And as a result - you know, what I should be focusing on, only frankly, at the moment is dealing with these issues in north Queensland not having to reopen a detention centre on Christmas Island because Bill Shorten the Labor Party wanted to go and crash border protection in this country.

INTERVIEWER: And implement a policy –

PRIME MINISTER: The money I’m going to spend on Christmas Island, I would very much like to be spending all of that up in north Queensland. That's where the rubber hits the road.

INTERVIEWER: Well if the Labor Party - and this very political, I know he’s pretending it’s not –

PRIME MINISTER: Just on North Queensland, let me be clear, I'm still going to make sure that’s happening. But you can imagine my fury and frustration.

INTERVIEWER: And I think the public feel that way as well and it is political. He’s saying; “Oh, get the politics out of it.” It is political. But if the Labor Party in Opposition will reject the advice from the Department, from ASIO and from security and intelligence people, what chance do any of us have when they are in government?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that's right and they say they'll still turn boats back. Well, really? really? Tanya Plibersek sitting in the National Security Committee with Bill Shorten? “Trust us, we’ll still turn boats back”. They’ve got no idea what's involved.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you.

PRIME MINISTER: I know, I did it.

INTERVIEWER: Yes, I know. Well listen we thank you for that, we'll talk again and we'll keep you posted on the feedback from the farmers as well.

PRIME MINISTER: Can I just say one last thing Alan.

INTERVIEWER: Yes?

PRIME MINISTER: Sisters of the North; they have done an amazing job in raising funds for people up there and there's a bloke up there, Tim Pratt who runs a trucking company.

INTERVIEWER: Yes, the cap.

PRIME MINISTER: He was the one, I wore a cap of his and people sledged me for the hat.

INTERVIEWER: The cap on, good on you. Good on you. 

PRIME MINISTER: But he's got a thing called Gumnut Designz and they're selling hats to raise money for Sisters of the North which is supporting those local charities up there. In about 24 hours they'd raised 120 grand, when I got there on Thursday night. It's awesome.

INTERVIEWER: Leave it with me.

PRIME MINISTER: I'll send you the details.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Ben.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much for joining us on the line.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s alright, Tony was making a lot of sense there, I didn’t want to interrupt him.

INTERVIEWER: I thought you might have been listening in and I know you’ve had a busy afternoon, so thank you for jumping on the line and talking to us. Look, he was suggesting that this was evidence, what we’re watching today, with Bill Shorten’s support of this medevac bill, that he’s not fit to be Prime Minister. Is that a blunt and honest assessment?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it is. He hasn’t got the ticker for it when it comes to this stuff. I mean when it comes to national security, you don’t trade in it, it’s an area of pure conviction, you do things because you believe it. You don’t sort of flip and flop, which he has done here. It’s very similar to what happened with Kim Beazley all those years ago and John Howard. It’s almost like a rerun and this is the great problem I have with Labor; they can never, ever, ever learn the lesson. They think they can fiddle with this stuff, just like they did when they got rid of temporary protection visas in 2008 and now the boats come. They think; “Oh, it won’t make any difference.”

I mean Bill Shorten said; “We’re getting the balance right.” The last Labor Prime Minister who said that was Kevin Rudd and they just never, ever learn.

INTERVIEWER: You’ve acted as Immigration Minister, you know more about stopping boats than anyone else in Australia; will people smugglers re-start their trade because of this bill?

PRIME MINISTER: That is the great risk we’re now facing. I’m going to do everything to make sure that doesn’t happen and the only thing standing between a boat and Australia is me and Peter Dutton and our Government. They know our resolve. But if we were not there, I can guarantee you they’d be coming thick and fast, that’s what would happen. Now if one comes, it will be the result of this weakening.

I had the National Security Committee meet this morning, which I convened. We took a number of decisions to strengthen what we were doing with Operation Sovereign Borders. We’ve done that. We’ve taken now, the step – sadly – we will have to re-open the Christmas Island detention centre. That will come at a cost and we haven’t finalized those costs yet. But that’s what Labor knew would be the consequences when they did this. They just disregarded the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force, the head of ASIO, the head of the Department of Home Affairs. They just went and did it anyway.

It showed terrible weakness on Bill Shorten’s part. I mean, it’s the only way I can put it Ben it was just sheer weakness.

INTERVIEWER: Is it right that there’s already been a reaction in parts of the world where people smugglers ply their trade, that there’s already chatter in that part of the world?

PRIME MINISTER: That doesn’t surprise me at all, because what they look for is a change of policy. Now, we haven’t changed our policy, but what the Parliament has done is to force one upon us. That’s just how the people smugglers work. See all these journalists down here in Canberra, in the bubble, they think all these little nuances matter - and the Labor Party think it - to the people smugglers. They just turn up to someone sitting up there in Indonesia and they say: “Guess what, they changed the laws down there in Australia, you can get on a boat now. Let’s go” that’s what they do. They think they’re all sort of glued to listening to journalists down here in Canberra, explaining the intricacies of these things. It’s nonsense.

INTERVIEWER: I can remember a Four Corners investigation into people smugglers and some of them that were based here in Australia and that was the case.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER: I remember the interviews with some of the people and they were just saying; ‘They kept lying to us and lying to us and lying to us about where we were going, what we were doing, what would happen when we were on the boat.” That’s obviously what they do. 

PRIME MINISTER: They’re criminals. That’s what criminals do, they lie.

INTERVIEWER: Have our intelligence agencies actually heard any chatter though, because it’s being reported by David Speers, that he’s been told that Australia’s intelligence agencies believe that “the beast is stirring,” since the passage of the medevac bill? They’re trying to ensure that the beast doesn’t wake up, the beast of course being the people smuggling trade. Have you been told by our intelligence agencies that there is chatter?

PRIME MINISTER: I could never confirm that one way or the other Ben, because that’s intelligence that I receive as Prime Minister. So I can’t comment on that for obvious reasons, but what my job is, is to make sure that beast doesn’t wake up. I can tell you, Bill has given it a big poke, that’s what he has done. He’s done it willfully and he’s done it because he can’t stand up to the far left of his own Party. I mean you’ve got Tanya Plibersek running immigration and border protection for the Labor Party now. Just picture this for me; Bill Shorten chairing the National Security Committee with Tanya Plibersek sitting alongside him and whoever else they’ve got in there - and they are going to decide whether boats get turned back? I mean what they’ve done is, they’ve already said they’re going to give permanent visas to people who arrive illegally by boat, enter Australia illegally. They’ve already said that. They’re going to get rid of what we put back in place. They’ve now basically trashed offshore processing as we know it and they’re telling the Australian people, “Oh trust us, we’ll turn boats back.” Give me a break. Bill Shorten does not have the ticker or the mettle for that and he demonstrated that in the Parliament yesterday and if he ever tells anyone, “Oh the Coalition and us, we have the same border protection policy.” That’s complete guff. We don’t. He doesn’t have the strength for it, he doesn’t have the policies for it, he doesn’t have a clue about it.

INTERVIEWER: One of the issues here obviously is that when people get a medical transfer to Australia then a lot of them then launch legal actions to stay. I think out of those who have come here, more than half of them have done that, engaged lawyers and said; “Righto, I’m not going back.”

PRIME MINISTER: That’s exactly what happens, that’s exactly what happens. So look, this is why they play with this stuff thinking they can appease people in their own party. I mean, if Bill Shorten had any ticker he would have stood up to them and said; “No, no, we need to have strong borders. We said that the Coalition had got it right and that we’d stuffed it up and that we can never go back there.” That’s what he should have said. But he didn’t do that. He just rolled over. This bloke is seriously, seriously weak.

INTERVIEWER: I really got the sense watching you at the National Press Club that you are going to stick a stake in the ground on this and just stand to it and not budge a centimetre. And you made a call and I’m paraphrasing here, but you said; “Bill Shorten is looking for the middle ground here, but you can’t find middle ground on 1,200 people dying.” And I don’t know, it strikes me that you’ve got a very strong argument to go to the next election and also to say to people, “We don’t want to see hundreds of people drowning and dying like we saw last time.” I mean, who would risk that?

PRIME MINISTER: I remember the debates. I remember when that boat crashed up on the jagged rocks of Christmas Island. I remember the debates in the Parliament when the Labor members came in and they cried in the Parliament. The tears have run dry because their memories have gone. That’s what’s happened. They have not learned the lessons from those tragic events and they are doomed to repeat them if they’re elected.

INTERVIEWER: And if anyone is trying to convince you to change your mind, forget about it, it’s game on.

PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely. I mean, I know what works. I know from bitter and difficult experience what works. Because I lived it and I did it with Tony and Peter who has done it since and we’re part of that team. And we’re going to do everything we can to make sure one doesn’t come. If one does come, it’s on Bill’s head and if one doesn’t come, I can assure you it’s because they know that Peter and I and Tony, we’re all still here and we’re going to do everything we can to stop them.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us, appreciate your time.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Alan.

INTERVIEWER: Just a quick one on Townsville, I know you have been there.

PRIME MINISTER: I have. Look, all the best of Australia is on display in Townsville, as you’d expect it to be. Last night, when I arrived there it was still raining, but it’s subsided and the water level dropped quite a lot today. And so families are now facing the hard task of walking back into homes with mud all the way through. I met with quite a lot of them today, young kids, and you know the bedroom, the carpet and everything. So that’s going to be the tough part of this week as they go back. But I’ve got to tell you, the Third Brigade are heroes. The emergency service workers, the Red Cross, all of them, the evacuation centres. I walked down one street, at one end of the street they had been inundated, at the other end it had just lapped on where the sandbags were and everyone down that end of the street were down helping people at the other.

INTERVIEWER: Can I just tell you what they’re saying though on struggle street. They’re not harsh, we’re not harsh about foreign aid, our foreign aid bill is $4.2 billion. We give $1.3 billion to the Pacific, they say that’s important, the Pacific are part of our family. But there is another $3 billion, they say to me, “Why doesn’t the Prime Minister ring these countries and say, “listen I’ve got to look after my own people first, I’m going to have to allocate all of that $3 billion up here.” Now I know you’ve said $1,000 for adults and $400 for kids. You’re a father, you know how far $1,000 and $400 go, it doesn’t go anywhere.

PRIME MINISTER: It goes much more than that. I mean, there is a 13 week disaster allowance payment for those whose incomes are disrupted…

INTERVIEWER: But are you going to throw any money in there to restore and rehabilitate these people?

PRIME MINISTER: Of course we are, and that’s exactly why I was up there today and that’s the next phase of the recovery. We went to Category C today in terms of the assistance that’s provided.

INTERVIEWER: They’ve lost businesses.

PRIME MINISTER: I know, and that’s what this support does. It provides concessional loans for businesses to get through, it provides that additional support. So 13 weeks of allowances. So that’s about $12,000.

INTERVIEWER: How would you like to get a concessional loan though, you can’t pay it back.

PRIME MINISTER: We’re going to be spending tens of millions of dollars in Townsville just on the income support payments and the emergency payments alone. That’s before we get into the infrastructure side of things on the other side of this. So there will be no shortage of assistance, there will be no shortage of cash support and other support that is needed for Townsville to rebuild, just as it is down in Huonville. I mean, one of the things in Tasmania - I was there the previous day – while large tracks of Tasmania have been incinerated, things like the Walls of Jerusalem, Cradle Mountain are unaffected. The best thing Australians can do to support the Tasmanians with the bushfires is have a holiday in Tasmania.

INTERVIEWER: Absolutely true. Look, this has come back this Kerryn Phelps bill. I think, and we both think, that this is just diabolical.

PRIME MINISTER: So do I.

INTERVIEWER: I was under the impression… Pardon?

PRIME MINISTER: So do I, it is diabolical.

INTERVIEWER: You have written though Mr Shorten…

PRIME MINISTER: I have.

INTERVIEWER: I was under the impression that you would be voting against the bill.

PRIME MINISTER: We are.

INTERVIEWER: You’re going to vote against the bull?

PRIME MINISTER: Of course.

INTERVIEWER: But there is an argument that that would create a constitutional crisis and you’d be frightened of going to an election.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s rubbish.

INTERVIEWER: Well where does this business come from about you proposing a so-called ‘medical transfer clinical assurance panel’ to quote, “Provide clinical assurance on decisions about medical evacuations.” In other words, you’re not going to outsource it to two doctors but you’re going to actually agree with the Phelps proposal.

PRIME MINISTER: No no, that’s not what it is at all Alan. What it is is this: the way it works currently is clinicians decide whether someone should be transferred, OK? That’s not going to change. There’s clinicians who work within the Department of Home Affairs and they make the decisions about who moves and who doesn’t and that’s overseen by the Department of Home Affairs. All that I have done is made sure that the Australian people have got an assurance about how well that process works. They can’t change the decisions, they can’t reverse the decisions, the decisions all remain with the Department of Home Affairs and that does two things. One, it gives Australians confidence - as they should have – in the medical care that is being provided and it keeps the decision with the Government. I won’t be compromising on this Bill. If the Labor Party want to support this Bill and abolish offshore processing as they know it, it’ll be on their head. And if we lose that vote next week, so be it. We won’t be going off to the polls. The election is in May. I will simply ignore it and we’ll get on with business. But I’m not going to be howled down by the Labor Party who want to dismantle a border protection system I had a key hand in building.

INTERVIEWER: The Kerryn Phelps… just one thing, can I sum up. The Kerryn Phelps Bill as I see it simply, in language that struggle street understands, is outsourcing immigration policy to two doctors.

PRIME MINISTER: And it is worse than that. Let me take you through it. Yes, it is that. You just need two doctors on Skype who say, “Well I can’t really see from here so you need to be brought to Australia so I can see you here.” That’s it. 400 people will come, single males from Manus Island, Nauru, within weeks, which will overwhelm our detention system. We’ve closed 19 detention centres. We’ll have to re-open Christmas Island. We’ll have to re-open detention centres that we were able to close because of our strong border protection policies. But it gets worse. In those circumstances they say, “Oh, but if there is a negative security assessment.” They give them a very short period of time. Now some of these people will never have even gone through that process, and as Peta will recall, security assessments particularly for those who have no papers are very difficult to determine.

But there is more, when it comes to character issues on our Migration Act, we can reject people. Now, there is nothing to stop in that case someone who is a paedophile, a rapist, who has committed murder, any of these other crimes, can just be moved on the say so of a couple of doctors on Skype. This is a stupid Bill, it is written by people who haven’t got the faintest idea how this works. We do and I am so appalled that the Labor Party would even play this sort of political game to get a cheap vote in the House next week. If that’s what he wants, if Bill Shorten is going to sell out our border protection to get a cheap, opportunistic win in the Parliament next week, well he can have it. I will stay on the side of strong border protection and he can take a running jump.

INTERVIEWER: Well PM, he has already supported it. Labor have supported it in the Upper House.

PRIME MINISTER: They’ve already voted for it.

INTERVIEWER: Absolutely. So it’s through one Chamber of Parliament. I don’t see any indication publicly from the Opposition Leader that he’s going to back down. You’ve written to him, I’ve read a copy of the letter. Four pages of detailed argument why this is a very, very stupid move for border protection, for national sovereignty, for all the things that the Government has fought to turn around in the last six years. Have you heard from Bill Shorten, is he prepared to reconsider this?

PRIME MINISTER: No he hasn’t responded to me as yet. We will see. He is writing more letters at the moment on other topics. It is a big question of character, though.

INTERVIEWER: But just summing up simply, because you’ve got to get this message through simply. Doesn’t even such a minor change, isn’t that really an incentive to people smugglers to start up?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh there’s no doubt. It is exactly as you said with the fishing boat captain from Indonesia. But Labor, don’t forget, their promising not temporary visas in Australia. They’re promising permanent visas in Australia. The first thing that happened in August 2008, when the boats started coming, we remember, Labor abolished temporary protection visas that were put in by the Howard Government. That’s when the boats started. Labor’s policy at this election is to abolish temporary protection visas again. That means anyone who illegally entered Australia can be given a permanent visa, which means citizenship. Now we stopped it.

INTERVIEWER: So you’re not scared of the fight next week?

PRIME MINISTER: Not at all Peta.

INTERVIEWER: One of the messages that kept coming out in the last few days is that you’re looking to find a back door way to avoid the Phelps vote. But if it goes to a vote, you’re prepared to stand and fight on principle?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ll vote it down.

INTERVIEWER: That will harden your support?

PRIME MINISTER: If that means that the vote goes down, it will be on Bill Shorten’s head. Now, Bill Shorten wants me to blame the crossbenchers for this. No no, Bill, it’s all on your head. You vote against it. You break it, you own it.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you. Just on letters, to get away from all of this, you actually have written to the Prime Minister of Thailand about that soccer player Hakeem which I find a disgraceful episode, he’s gone there. Bahrain is seeking extradition, Interpol apparently, someone has dobbed this fellow in. You have written to the Prime Minister of Thailand about 10 days ago, has he responded?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah he has, we got a response the other night. I have also written to him again, that letter crossed over on my second because I was very disturbed at the appearance of Hakeem at the hearing the other day. He was shackled and I thought that was, I thought that was very upsetting and I know it would have upset many Australians and I’m respectfully reminding the Thai Prime Minister that Australians feel very strongly about this. Very, very strongly.

INTERVIEWER: We helped rescue people from a cave, didn’t we?

PRIME MINISTER: This is true and they were our Australians of the Year, in fact. And so we will continue to make these representations, not just to Thailand but also to Bahrain as well, and we are. Our officials are doing a very good job.

INTERVIEWER: The bloke’s in jail.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’re in a process there but as I said on the road the other day, it’s not my job to get upset, it’s my job to get him home.

INTERVIEWER: Just let me allude to a speech you made last week, you said it’s important to remind all of us that our economy cannot be taken for granted. That the economy is real, its impacts are real, and most importantly it’s about people. Now that’s all terrific but in 2007 Kevin 07, the people in the public, the voters, the people you are talking to now didn’t seem to understand that it was real, what Howard and Costello had achieved. It would be safe with Labor. Threw them out, we’ve now seen what’s happened subsequently. How are you going to prosecute this case when Chris Bowen is talking about $20 billion of taxes…

PRIME MINISTER: $200 billion. Or as you said the other day, $20 thousand million.

INTERVIEWER: That’s right, $20 thousand million, I’m telling you to say it and I’ve got it mixed up myself. $20 thousand million worth of taxes.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s true and the most pernicious is this retiree tax. $5 billion a year stolen from the lives of retired Australians but also small business owners and others who are affected. Tim Wilson and the House Committee have been holding these hearings around the country. When I was up in Queensland they were holding them. The stories, just one after the other, and Labor’s response is to arrogantly dismiss them and now start flinging dirt at anyone who accuses them on this. This retiree tax isn’t reform, there’s no reform. It is just a naked tax grab. You know, the reason people put up taxes – if you can’t control how much you tax, you can’t control how much you spend. This is the way we’ve got the Budget back into surplus, which we will have for the first time in 12 years on the 2nd of April this year. You control your taxes, you control your spending, your economy grows and we all move forward. It’s taken us 12 years to get back from Labor last time.

INTERVIEWER: Let me take you to a point that Chris Bowen has made which, if I might say to you, critically I don’t think your Government has addressed. I’ve never heard a more nonsense observation, he said, “Why are we the only country in the world who would let people claim an income tax refund when they paid no income tax in this year? It’s generous but it’s not sustainable.” Can I suggest to you that there are plenty of examples of refunds being paid to people and businesses who paid no tax. Half the population pay no net tax.

PRIME MINISTER: Well this is right. In cases when you take in all the benefits and so on, you can have cases of people earning up to 80,000 a year and they pay no net tax. You still have thankfully a majority of people who do but that said, we’re close to a tipping point and I think that’s very concerning. And look, Chris just doesn’t seem to understand how the tax system works. I mean, the way company tax works is basically a withholding tax and you end up paying it on what your own personal tax rate is. Now, there is a reason why retirees have a zero tax rate. It’s because they’re in the retirement phase and they’ve paid taxes all their life. The most offensive thing Labor says about the retiree tax is they haven’t paid any tax. Give me a break, they’ve been paying tax all their lives.

INTERVIEWER: Good on you.

PRIME MINISTER: And in comes the big dark hand of Labor to rip it out of your pockets.

INTERVIEWER: Well done.

PRIME MINISTER: We’re fighting this every day and Australians are waking up to it. And it’s not just the retirees.

INTERVIEWER: It’s a good argument, that. They’ve paid tax all their life, that answers that argument. There are a lot of people who pay no tax and get a refund at the end of the year. Thems are the rules. Every Labor leader up until now has agreed with the current system about franking credits.

PRIME MINISTER: They have. It was bipartisan policy and the reason they’re doing it is because they don’t know how to control their spending.

INTERVIEWER: And Kim Beazley argued, and Simon Crean who was the leader said, “We must do this because it’s fair.”

INTERVIEWER: And look, they’re angry because in the 2016 Budget the Liberal Party hit them with superannuation changes when Tony Abbott and you were elected under the same banner in 2013 said there wouldn’t be. I’m going to ask you a question, put you in the hot seat, will there be any changes if you’re elected next term on superannuation or do you rule them out?

PRIME MINISTER: I rule them out.

INTERVIEWER: No further changes?

PRIME MINISTER: No, none. I think last time I was on the program I said the same thing.

INTERVIEWER: Can we just take this negative gearing thing, just very very simple. I mean, there is a bit of a housing crisis at the moment. Negative gearing is related to tax, so people say well I’ve got a choice to where I’m going to put my $600,000, I’ll put it in an investment property and I’ll get certain tax benefits. But by putting it in an investment property, I actually am going to rent it so there is a greater pool of rental properties and accommodation.

PRIME MINISTER: 30 per cent of the housing market is rental accommodation as a result of mum and dad investors.

INTERVIEWER: So if suddenly that incentive doesn’t exist, I’ll take my $600,000 and I’ll put it into BHP shares. Therefore, there is less rental accommodation. Rent goes up but there’s fewer people bidding on Peta’s house when she goes to sell it. So Peta’s house is worth less. Now here we are attacking a house owner and a renter, how the hell can you win an election?

PRIME MINISTER: This is exactly as it is. This is how I describe their policy. You buy a house now, it’s like buying a car. The minute you drive the car off the lot, the value goes down because you’re selling it to a smaller market. It is exactly the same now under Labor’s policy for buying a house and it affects everybody’s house. 

INTERVIEWER: Can I just be a bit critical of you here if I might. Do you think you’re fighting on too many front? I think with an election coming, there are certain issues here which really dramatically… I mean, I’m not really worried about tariffs on kavas or whatever you were talking about in Fiji.

PRIME MINISTER: That was a very specific issue for them.

INTERVIEWER: Right, these are powerful points. See, if you take the Capital Gains Tax. Now again, it’s a simple issue, isn’t it. I mean, you don’t buy anything, an asset, for the sake of it and make a loss. You hope you’ll make a quid.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s right.

INTERVIEWER: There’s nothing wrong with making a quid. They’re going to increase the tax on the Capital Gain by 50 per cent.

PRIME MINISTER: 50 per cent on everything, not just on… it’s on shops, small businesses. See, you were talking about negative gearing before. Capital Gains Tax works the same way. Small businesses will go and invest in a rental property or in their own shops and things like this and this is what hits them. And it’s not just them - one in five of them are police officers. Peta knows, my dad was a police officer. One in five police officers negative gear. One in five. Labor likes to make out that they’re all, you know, dentists from well to do suburbs who own eight properties. That’s rubbish.

INTERVIEWER: No, it’s ordinary people.

PRIME MINISTER: The vast majority of people… you know, there are more people who negative gear properties in the federal electorate of Capricornia based on Rockhampton than in my southern seat of Cook in Sydney. Because people up there have worked in the mining industry, in the construction industry, and they’re creating opportunities for themselves. Labor hates it when people want to do better. They basically just want to keep everybody where they are, dependent on the Government.

INTERVIEWER: We’re going to go, you’ve got to go somewhere else. You’ve been everywhere today. Just one final question, how could anybody vote for a Government that is talking about a 50 per cent renewable energy target or do you think the public are wedded to the view that this is the answer to our energy future? Don’t people understand what happened in South Australia, what’s just happened in Victoria? 200,000 homes reliant. Hazelwood is closed, 25 per cent of the power is gone. Liddell is likely to close here. Yet everyday - you are a Sydney man – the power that drives the toaster and the hot water in your kitchen, 92 per cent of that power is generated by coal-fired power. They are talking about renewable energy, how do you prosecute that case?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s pretty simple. A 45 per cent emissions reduction target wipes out Australian industries. I mean, the Boyne Island Smelter up there in Gladstone is gone. That’s 1,000 jobs. It’s gone. They can’t exist under Labor’s 45 per cent emissions reductions target. Australians want us to take sensible and practical and achievable action when it comes to our environment. But they do not want to sell our economy. They don’t.

INTERVIEWER: …investing in new, coal-fired power station this side of an election? Do we think anyone is going to get into the market?

PRIME MINISTER: Well you couldn’t build one of this side of the election.

INTERVIEWER: No, I’m not suggesting that at all PM. But people have been talking underwater. The Finkel Report says HELE is the way to go, it’s the most available, it’s cheaper.

PRIME MINISTER: Well they’ve got to make it stack up, as you know. I mean, the new ones…

INTERVIEWER: You could build a dam.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’re putting money into dams as you know, and there’s quite a number, we’re doing one up in North Queensland in Hughenden, that’s one we’ve been moving on over the last few months.

INTERVIEWER: But coal today, in the ABS stats, is our number one export. It’s propping up everyone’s budgets right around the country, yet we’re treating it like it’s a demon property here in Australia, likes it’s kryptonite. Do you think we’ll see a coal-fired power station?

PRIME MINISTER: I believe we’ll see, whether it’s that or that extended life of existing stations done on a commercial basis, but it all has to be done on a commercial basis.

INTERVIEWER: But can you look down the camera here before you go and just say, as the Prime Minister of Australia, you want to tell all Australians there is no future other than a future in the dark if we don’t understand the importance of coal-fired power to the economic and personal well-being of Australians.

PRIME MINISTER: Well I will say, I don’t care where the power comes from, so long as it’s reliable and it turns up every day…

INTERVIEWER: And affordable.

PRIME MINISTER: And of course affordable. And it is going to, that is going to be a big part of the mix for a very long time to come.

INTERVIEWER: Coal, you mean.

PRIME MINISTER: Now that is true, as is gas, as is hydro.

INTERVIEWER: There’s the camera, what do you say to the Australian people? Coal is going to be a part of mix.

PRIME MINISTER: I’d really like them to get the gas out from under the ground, Alan, they’ve locked it up here in New South Wales and in Victoria for too long and you know what that’s done to electricity prices? That.

INTERVIEWER: Coal-fired power. Listen, good to talk to you.

PRIME MINISTER: You too.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for what you’re doing and we’ll talk again, we hope.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah and congratulations to Johnny Morris too, I think he’s going to do a great job down with those Sharks, what do you reckon?

INTERVIEWER: Hmm, well this is Cronulla of course, the Prime Minister is a Cronulla supporter. I think what the Rugby League has done to Shane Flanagan is a disgrace.

PRIME MINISTER: Well you know my view on that, you and I are both big fans of Shane and he has got a wonderful family and he has been a great son of the Shire down there.

INTERVIEWER: A good man.

PRIME MINISTER: He is a good man.

INTERVIEWER: He made the mistake of speaking to his players when they were really facing personal crisis. If that’s a mistake, I’m on Shane Flanagan’s side.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’ve both always been on that side, for a long time.

INTERVIEWER: Go and get the cap on, we’ll see you next time.

PRIME MINISTER: It’s been great to here in Brisbane all week actually, we’ve had a really, really strong week and great to see so many wonderful people out and about.

INTERVIEWER: Before we have a proper chat we should take care of business because we’ve been saying that we’re going to do ‘Smarter than Suse’ so let’s do that first and then we’ll have a proper chat after, see how you go against Sue.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure this is, you know, this is crunch time.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah it’s cattle stations

INTERVIEWER: Are you aware of the stickers? There’s that one if you win.

PRIME MINISTER: Well my secret in life is to always have assumed that I’m never the smartest person in the room. Plenty of people assume the opposite and usually get themselves into trouble.

INTERVIEWER: Either with the honest part or Suse sticker-

INTERVIEWER: A lot to play for.

INTERVIEWER: I’m not smarter than Suse either.

INTERVIEWER: Here we go.

INTERVIEWER: So Suse is in the sound proof booth, you can testify to that ScoMo.

PRIME MINISTER: [inaudible]

INTERVIEWER: It is legit she can’t hear us in there. Now I don’t if your people behind the scenes have explain the rules or I’ll go through it here.

PRIME MINISTER: Go through them.

INTERVIEWER: So what you’ve gone on, I’m going to ask you five questions. You’ve got 30 seconds to answer those five questions, OK? Now if you want to you can pass and we’ll come back to it.

PRIME MINISTER: OK.

INTERVIEWER: But Suse never gets beaten on time and if it’s a draw the person with the quickest time wins.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

INTERVIEWER: So don’t pass, just say you don’t know and move on.

INTERVIEWER: If you say don’t know I’ll just go straight on to the next question.

INTERVIEWER: Won’t come back to it.

PRIME MINISTER: OK let’s see how we go.

INTERVIEWER: Alright, Prime Minister you’ve up against Susan. Prime Minister you’ve got 30 seconds on the clock and your time starts now. What is the capital of New Zealand?

PRIME MINISTER: Wellington.

INTERVIEWER: Name the comedian who withdrew from hosting the 2019 Oscars?

PRIME MINISTER: Pass.

INTERVIEWER: Spell vacuum.

PRIME MINISTER: V A C U U M.

INTERVIEWER: What kind of animal is the Disney character Dumbo?

PRIME MINISTER: An elephant.

INTERVIEWER: What is 176 minus 86?

PRIME MINISTER: 90.

INTERVIEWER: Name the comedian who withdrew from hosting the 2019 Oscars? Dunno?

PRIME MINISTER: Dunno.

INTERVIEWER: So stop, stop. Yeah so we had to go back because you said pass.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh sorry.

INTERVIEWER: You burnt some time there, that’s what I’m sort of saying but that’s alright. Not bad, not bad on time you had five seconds left.

INTERVIEWER: It was pretty good.

INTERVIEWER: So if it comes down to it that could be enough-

INTERVIEWER: She sometimes struggles on the spelling too.

INTERVIEWER: Here she comes now by the way PM you are playing for Brenda from Aspley so if you beat-

INTERVIEWER: She’s one of your constituents. Is Aspley one of your seats? I don’t know what that would be um, I don’t think is.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no it’s a long way north.

INTERVIEWER: You could win, you could a win a vote here.

PRIME MINISTER: Cronulla is a long way from Aspley.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah I think Aspley might be within a Labor seat.

INTERVIEWER: I was just checking my previous results against ah, I beat Turnbull.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER: Oh did you?

INTERVIEWER: I lost against Shorten.

INTERVIEWER: Oh OK, alright.

PRIME MINISTER: I’m not planning to do that.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: This could be a benchmark here, let’s see how we go.

INTERVIEWER: [Advertising read out].

Now this is tradition Prime Minister that Susie has her own song.

INTERVIEWER: Pump her up for code of conduct? In general terms don’t put a balaclava over your head when you’re in the same room as the Prime Minister but he has to do this as a thing.

[Music played]

INTERVIEWER: We’ve got to explain to the Prime Minister why you’re wearing what you’re wearing right now.

INTERVIEWER: Susie says it distracts from the fact that I’ve got a huge nose and I’ve got a forehead, a massive forehead and googly eyes and I sometimes put her off so she’s asked for me to wear the ski mask-

INTERVIEWER: It’s self-explanatory you didn’t really need to explain it.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: It’s really ugly, that’s what it is, yeah.

INTERVIEWER: Do you do that with any of your employees, do you ask them to wear a ski mask?

INTERVIEWER: There’s one in every office.

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: Don’t do it?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

INTERVIEWER: Don’t answer that.

INTERVIEWER: Alright, Susan O’Neill up against the Prime Minister you’ve got 30 seconds on the clock and your time starts now.  What is the capital of New Zealand?

INTERVIEWER: Christchurch.

INTERVIEWER: Name the comedian who withdrew from hosting the 2019 Oscars?

INTERVIEWER: Jimmy Kimmel.

INTERVIEWER: Spell vacuum?

INTERVIEWER: V A C double U M.

INTERVIEWER: What kind of animal is the Disney character Dumbo?

INTERVIEWER: He’s an elephant.

INTERVIEWER: What is 176 minus 86?

INTERVIEWER: 90.

INTERVIEWER: Stop the clock.  

INTERVIEWER: Quick, that’s good on time. You had ten seconds left Suse. Prime Minister had five so in the event of a tie breaker Susie wins.

PRIME MINISTER: Well done Susie, well done.

INTERVIEWER: [inaudible]

INTERVIEWER: Only in the event of a tie breaker.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh we’ve got to go again?

INTERVIEWER: No, no. We just go through the score, yeah.

PRIME MINISTER: Let’s go through it.

INTERVIEWER: OK the capital of New Zealand, Prime Minister said it was Wellington. Suse you said it was Christchurch.  It’s Wellington.

INTERVIEWER: Is it? How do you know that?

INTERVIEWER: Because he’s the Prime Minister.

INTERVIEWER: He went to Sydney Boys High.

PRIME MINISTER: If I didn’t know it would be a problem.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: How offended would New Zealand be?

INTERVIEWER: Can you imagine if you answered that incorrectly? That would have been worldwide news today.

INTERVIEWER: The New Zealand PM on the phone. You what? You said what?

INTERVIEWER: It’s one nil to the Prime Minister. Name the comedian who withdrew from the hosting the 2019 Oscars. PM passed and then came back and didn’t know.  You said it was Jimmy-

INTERVIEWER: Jimmy Kimmel or something.

INTERVIEWER: Kevin Hart.

INTERVIEWER: Oh, that’s right.

INTERVIEWER: It’s one nil Prime Minister.  Top of the third spell vacuum, you both said V A C U U M. You’re on the board Suse.  Two one to the PM.  What kind of animal is the Disney character Dumbo? You both said elephant it’s three two to the Prime Minister. 176 minus 86 is 90 you both said that it’s a four three victory and the PM has done what Malcolm Turnbull couldn’t and what Bill Shorten did and that is prove that he’s smarter than Suse. 

INTERVIEWER: Well done.

INTERVIEWER: Well done Scott.

PRIME MINISTER: Well-

INTERVIEWER: And we hand over the official sticker which I’m sure you’ll appreciate.

PRIME MINISTER: She’s the bigger legend there’s no doubt about that.

INTERVIEWER: She’s the cat’s mother [laughter] sorry that’s a private joke.

INTERVIEWER: Brenda out at Aspley picked up 100 bucks too and maybe a vote for you I’d have to say.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you Brenda tell your friends.

INTERVIEWER: And we’ll come back and chat with the Prime Minister right after this.

[Advertisement/traffic advice/music break]

PRIME MINISTER: That’s what this stuff is about I mean, I mean I’m you know families are important, families should have meals together at night and not spend, you know, the evenings-

INTERVIEWER: [Inaudible] in traffic, what you realise is how quickly Brisbane is growing, I mean Ash drives from the coast every day I did it this morning from down at Coolangatta and if you’re not past Springwood by 20 past 5 you’re done, like it’s gridlock at that hour, people are up early, there’s so many more people on the roads so it’s moving, the wheels keep moving.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s the big thing I think in Brisbane say over the last ten/15 years I mean, you know, I grew up in Sydney and it’s always been congested and we’ve got to do a lot there too and Melbourne is the same but Brisbane has been growing really rapidly and that’s been great because people’s businesses have been growing and they’ve been doing well and there’s lots of jobs and that’s all fantastic but you’ve got to keep the congestion busting happening.

So I was at Indooroopilly public school yesterday and we’re upgrading the drop off area there as well so these really small things in the scheme, these aren’t you know billion dollar projects they’re just $7 million here, $5 million here, $12 million here and they’re going to make a big difference to those intersections. Safety as well, as well as getting home and getting on the site, you know, plenty of tradies I’m sure listening this morning they don’t make any money sitting in traffic they make it when they get on site.

INTERVIEWER: Have you noticed the scooters around? Because Brisbane is like the test city for those electric scooters.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh yeah, I saw a bloke zipping along Story Bridge yesterday.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, they’re everywhere.

PRIME MINSTER: He was fanging it, he was-

INTERVIEWER: I don’t get it quite frankly.

INTERVIEWER: I reckon they’re brilliant, yeah. So what do you reckon about them? Do you have an opinion on them yet?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh I don’t really care but so long as they’re safe and they don’t run into people.

INTERVIEWER: I mean you could have idiots riding ‘em because that’s human nature but you know on the whole they’re getting people off the roads you know, getting people scooting-

INTERVIEWER: So is that only Brisbane?

INTERVIEWER: Only Brisbane at this stage.

INTERVIEWER: It’s a test for Australia, yeah.

PRIME MINISTER: Kids like Segways and these things, I mean Segways are important tools for people with disabilities.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, yeah that’s alright, yeah.

INTERVIEWER: I would never step on a Segway, it seems incredibly dangerous to me.

INTERVIEWER: And the PM was telling a story, sorry Suse, PM was telling us off air that you swim every day, like you started incorporating swimming into your, into your routine now.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah I do well it’s for exercise but I’m a firm believer that politicians’ exercise should be kept very, not done in public, it’s not a pretty sight.

INTERVIEWER: Well how do you do that then?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh you make the time, it’s a good head space and it’s also, you know, good exercise and you know you’ve got to do that in these sorts of jobs and I’m enjoying it.

INTERVIEWER: DTs or boardies?

PRIME MINISTER: As I said it’s done in private.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: It’s very much done in private.

INTERVIEWER: I want to say nude?

INTERVIEWER: What’s a tip Suse, what’s the tip?

INTERVIEWER: Not a tip I was going to, I was actually going to say don’t wear budgie smugglers-

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: It’s been done hasn’t it?

INTERVIEWER: [Inaudible] I love it, it’s great stress release isn’t it?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah it is I just got to get the breathing right and I’m getting it there, I’ve got up to about 600 metres a day so that’s, if I can do it all in one go it will be even better.

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: Good on ya.

INTERVIEWER: How long are you in Brissy for?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh I’ve been here all week, I’m heading back down to Sydney tonight.

INTERVIEWER: Thanks for coming in.

PRIME MINISTER: No, no it’s great to be here, thanks for the fun and thanks for the opportunity to-

INTERVIEWER: You might have to race Susie in the pool next time.

INTERVIEWER: Oh that’s a good idea because I’d win that one.

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll just take this one, I’m not faster than Susie right now.

INTERVIEWER: And finally we all saw a picture of Shorten during the week making his kids’ lunches which I’m sure he does every day, I’m sure that wasn’t a photo op-

PRIME MINISTER: The strategically placed Vegemite sitting there. I didn’t think there was anything contrived about that.

INTERVIEWER: No, no it seemed very natural.

PRIME MINISTER: Really fair dinkum.

INTERVIEWER: But he was making his, that was the worst picture by the way, but he was making his kids’ sandwiches with wholemeal bread. Don’t do that to your children.

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t make the kids’ lunches.

INTERVIEWER: You don’t?

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t make them. They’ll be happy about that. I can cook them a great curry which I often do on a Saturday night with the kids and they help but no, no, I don’t make the lunches.

INTERVIEWER: Have you ever said when a kid goes Dad can you do something, you go gosh I thought I was the Prime Minister?

[Laughter]

INTERVIEWER: I’d be dropping that every day.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: That’s true at most places but not my house. 

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister welcome to 7.30 for 2019.

PRIME MINISTER: Great to be back Leigh.

INTERVIEWER: The Coalition has been in an election losing position in the polls for virtually its entire term. You have members of your frontbench choosing not to contest the election, high profile independents are running in key Liberal seats, cashed up groups like GetUp! are targeting you in vital marginal seats, all this against the recent backdrop of Coalition disunity and instability.

Is the kind of talk you’re engaging in today of re-election and ten year plans wishful thinking?

PRIME MINISTER: No, Leigh, I mean, just as well I’m a fighter when you listen to what you’ve just relayed out there which is I think is a particularly pessimistic way to look at things. I’m not looking at things like that at all.

What I’ve announced today is that we’ve got a goal, a pledge in fact of one and a quarter million new jobs and that’s not a vague promise because we’ve already delivered 1.2 million jobs as a government since we were first elected so that’s what I’m focussed on; a stronger economy to guarantee the essentials that Australians rely on.

That’s our record as a government, a good strong policy record and a clear plan that I announced today to take us into the future. Not a future with higher taxes but a future of a stronger economy which Australians need.

INTERVIEWER: When you’re talking about, as you say 1.25 million jobs, also income tax cuts, more spending on health and education, return to surplus, a ten year plan to eliminate debt. For you to achieve all of that you have to assume a continual best case scenario on lots of economic external factors instead of a pragmatic one. That is the definition of wishful thinking.

PRIME MINISTER: No that’s actually not true, Leigh, I mean doing what we’ve pledged today on jobs would actually not be at the peak rate of jobs growth that we’ve achieved over the last couple of years so I think that-

INTERVIEWER: But it’s the environment with all those other factors-

PRIME MINISTER: No, no not at all, Leigh. One of the marks of our economic management is that we’ve always exceeded expectations. One of the reasons that as Treasurer I was able to ensure that we maintained our AAA credit rating is I said we would hit a surplus in 2021, well we’re going to hit it in 19/20.

I have a track record of under promising and over delivering whether it’s on the economy, border protection, welfare reforms Leigh. My record, our government’s record is delivering and today we’ve set out new plans to deliver in the future for the stronger economy which enables us to list lung care medicines and get meningococcal vaccines to young Australians.

INTERVIEWER: On this point though that you’ve exceeded, that your government has exceeded expectations the Coalition record, doesn’t that pitch simply confuse voters along the lines of ‘well, hang on if your record is so good why did you need to dump Malcolm Turnbull?’

PRIME MINISTER: Well that was last year, Leigh, and what we’re focussed on is the plan we’re taking to the next election. It’s a plan based on our policy successes as a-

INTERVIEWER: [inaudible]

PRIME MINISTER: …government over the last five, I know your point is-

INTERVIEWER: My point is that-

PRIME MINISTER: Your point is about politics-

INTERVIEWER: [inaudible] aren’t you confusing, no aren’t you confusing voters? You’re saying our record is so fantastic, we’ve exceeded expectations it’s confusing to people, they just saw a Prime Minister get dumped a matter of months ago.

PRIME MINISTER: My break over the summer involved talking to people who were sharing with me about their need for having their job secure, being able to get home in time to spend time with their families which is why today I announced another $240 million going into urban congestion busting projects here in South East Queensland and that’s what we’re focussed on; the things that actually improve people’s lives. We’ve got a great track record of delivering on infrastructure because people can see the earth machine, moving machinery on sites now. 

We’ve got a great record on tax cuts because we’ve passed that through the Parliament with legislation. We’ve got a great track record on bringing the budget back to surplus because we will have the first surplus achieved by a government in 12 years when Josh brings that down on the 2nd April this year.

So that’s our policy record. What you’re talking about is politics. That’s a different thing.

INTERVIEWER: On policy you also have a plan you were discussing today, a ten year plan to wipe out debt, but that would mean for that plan to reach fruition the Coalition would be re-elected three times, there would be no external shocks. What do you say to the suggestion that that’s a plan at best based on rose coloured glasses and at worst a fantasy?

PRIME MINISTER: No what I said today is my goal is to see that debt gone, net debt gone by 2030. Now the decisions that made in the next three years in the budget will determine what happens with that budget over the next ten years. How do I know that? When Labor last came in 2007 the decisions they took in their first term actually led to the debt position we are in today. 

So no it’s not fantasy, it’s fair dinkum.  The decisions that are taken and in the next budget, the budget after that, the budget after that will determine the debt trajectory of our nation and the tax trajectory-

INTERVIEWER: Sorry, just while you’re on debt, you’ve been in office now for six years, you point out that Labor had a debt problem. Net debt at the end of their term in office was $202 billion, net debt today is $341 billion, you’ve taken it in the wrong direction.

PRIME MINISTER: Well because we’ve had to wind back the deficits of Labor and get the budget back into balance. You can’t reduce debt, Leigh, if you’re still running deficits. And so we’ve had to take down, from the record deficits of Labor, to bring the budget back into a surplus position for the next financial year. Now you can’t pay down debt until you get back into surplus and it has taken us the last five and a half years to wind back the baked in spending excesses of the Labor Party, to get the budget under control, and now we’ve turned the corner on debt and if we keep making those decisions that’s why my goal is you keep making those decisions and you will wipe out debt within 10 years. If you go down Labor’s path, you won’t.

INTERVIEWER: While we’re on Labor, you’ve said repeatedly today that the Australian economy will be weaker under a Labor government because it will impose higher taxes.

PRIME MINISTER: Correct.

INTERVIEWER: Where’s your evidence that higher taxes weaken an economy?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think it’s just fundamental economics 101, Leigh.

INTERVIEWER: But the Howard Government imposed a very big new tax on Australia, the GST, are you saying they weakened the economy?

PRIME MINISTER: No, they abolished taxes at the same time, Leigh. They actually lessened the overall individual tax burden on Australians. That’s why I don’t want to see, and I’ve legislated it at this end, in 94 per cent of cases, more than 32.5 cents in the dollar in tax. I’ve already cut taxes for small business. Today, I announced we’re cutting taxes further for small business by increasing the instant asset write off to $25,000 and that’s over $750 million worth of small businesses’ own money that they get to keep.

Lower taxes have been a key part of our economic plan that has generated record jobs growth, 1.2 million. The strongest growth in a year for young people, for people over 55, for women, right across the board, getting people off welfare and into work and a key part of our economic plan has been lower taxes. Labor wants to put a sheet anchor on the economy in $200 billion in higher taxes.

INTERVIEWER: But by your logic, if higher taxes in and of themselves generally weaken an economy, a country like Norway should be weak but it has some of the highest taxes in the world and yet the average Norwegian is richer and has a higher standard of living than the average Australian.

PRIME MINISTER: Australia has had 27 years of continuous economic growth. We are at the top of the leader pack when it comes to advanced developed economies in the world for economic growth, the world is looking to us in terms of how we’ve been able to succeed and how we’ve been able to succeed as a government is by keeping taxes low, backing small business, investing in infrastructure so people can get home on time and tradies can spend more time on the time and not in a traffic jam, expanding our export markets, defence industry procurement plans. I mean, this is how we’ve been growing the economy and the plan I announced today builds on that success.

INTERVIEWER: On the 1.25 million jobs that you’re promising if re-elected, of those how many will be filled by migrants?

PRIME MINISTER: Well migrants form part of the overall population flows into the country, we don’t have a breakdown of that, Leigh.

INTERVIEWER: Of the million jobs you’ve created how many have been filled by migrants?

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t have those figures to hand, Leigh. What I do know is that population growth has not run as high as jobs growth. So that means jobs growth has been at a higher rate than population growth and has been running at a higher rate than migration growth.

INTERVIEWER: Would it surprise you that half of the million jobs you’ve created were filled by migrants?

PRIME MINISTER: What I’m saying, Leigh, is that all Australians who are living here are getting more jobs today than they were before. When we came to office, the rate of jobs growth in Australia under Labor was 0.2 per cent, today, it’s 2.2 per cent. It’s 11 times higher. We inherited a basket case of a jobs program under the Labor Party and we’ve turned it into one of the biggest jobs generating governments in the history of the country.

INTERVIEWER: Let’s quickly run through some other issues before we run out of time. The Banking Royal Commission, does your government commit to implementing all of Commissioner Hayne’s recommendations?

PRIME MINISTER: Well in principle this is what our intention would be, but we’ve obviously got to see a report before we make a decision on that and that’s why the Treasurer has announced today that in a very measured process, over the weekend, once we receive that report which will be in the middle of a market day so you wouldn’t go and release it while the markets were open, the government will consider that over the weekend and provide an interim and initial, if not final, response on the Monday after the lockup after markets close. Now that’s important to ensure that there’s stability in the financial system, you don’t go shocking financial markets, you take your time on this. But I think that is a reasonable timeframe to ensure the Royal Commission report is released in a timely way and done so in a way which maximises stability for the financial system.

INTERVIEWER: We’ve seen evidence in those hearings of banks effectively stealing from customers, for example charging people for financial advice that they never intended to provide, would you expect criminal charges to flow from the Royal Commission?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m going to wait to see what he recommends, I’m not going to speculate on it. But I want to commend Commissioner Hayne for the outstanding job he has done. He has kept it in the time frame, he has got it done. He has also been very mindful, I think, of the impact of this Royal Commission on the financial system, and I think he’s been very careful not to exacerbate problems, particularly around credit restrictions. Now we have seen a fair bit of that happening. That has been impacting on the economy. So it’s important we ensure stability on how we respond to this report, and making sure the economy can continue to kick along without any unnecessary shocks.

INTERVIEWER: Three of your ministers, as I mentioned earlier, have said that they won’t recontest the federal election. You’ve said today that it’s offensive that their stated personal reasons for leaving are twisted into politics, for a political motivation.

PRIME MINISTER: It is actually.

INTERVIEWER: Perception is everything in politics, and three ministers quitting gives voters the perception of rats deserting a sinking ship.

PRIME MINISTER: Well who is creating that perception? The Labor Party have.

INTERVIEWER: Well haven’t three ministers in a row by saying they… [inaudible]

PRIME MINISTER: No they haven’t, because they have made very clear their personal reasons for doing that. Just like Gai Brodtmann did, just like Kate Ellis did, just like Jenny Macklin did, just like Wayne Swan did, just like Jacinta Collins has done, and what I find upsetting is, you know me Leigh, I’m for family values and when people raise issues like miscarriages with me, I’m not going to be so insensitive as to not understand fully the reasons for that decision. I think it’s pretty disappointing that Bill Shorten would cast a slur on Liberal members for genuine family reasons for leaving, but when it comes to Labor members it’s ok, I think this shows a failing of character, he should have just wished us well. He should have just wished Kelly O’Dwyer well. It’s ok for Tim Hammond, a bloke from Western Australia to say he is not going to stay one term of parliament, but for Kelly, who has served the parliament for almost 10 years, for her to leave because of quite personal reasons, particularly relating to issues that I’m sure all Australians would want to wish her well, I just find frankly quite disappointing.

INTERVIEWER: Just quickly, if the Coalition loses the election do you commit to staying on as leader of the party and therefore opposition leader?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m committed to winning the next election, and in the Liberal Party…

INTERVIEWER: If you lose though? As you said before it is a tough job.

PRIME MINISTER: It’s a tough job. That’s not my plan. Australia can’t afford Bill Shorten as a Prime Minister so I’ve got every energy flying into that and the leadership of the Liberal Party is always the gift of the parliamentary Liberal Party and I never make any presumptions upon it.

INTERVIEWER: And just finally on this programme recently Mr Shorten committed to doing two prime time interviews with 7.30 during the election campaign, would you be prepared to commit to the same?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ll go through the normal process of setting those Leigh, I’ve always been very available to 7.30 and always enjoy our friendly chats. 

INTERVIEWER: Well in that vein I look forward to seeing you twice in the election campaign, thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you Leigh. Good to talk to you.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison, good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Great to be with you John, I’ve always enjoyed coming in to be on your program. I remember once I called into you from Christmas Island on one occasion.

INTERVIEWER: Well you just reminded me it goes back to 2005.

PRIME MINISTER: Correct, yes.

INTERVIEWER: When you were just out of school.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: I was a little bit out of there I’ve got to say but mate, it’s good to be back here with you.

INTERVIEWER: Before we doing anything seriously, you went to Hemingway’s. Tell me, you went down there to have a few drinks with people down at Hemingway’s?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah we had a Politics in the Pub last night and then sort of moved more generally. This is the great thing about Cairns and about tourism in Cairns; it’s constantly reinventing the place. The city experience, the town experience here just gets better and better. Hemingway’s is just another example of that. But know you’ve got the cultural performing arts centre, you’ve got the new Aquarium. These are things that we’ve supported as a Government and Entschy in particular. I mean, Entschy goes all the way back to the boardwalk. It’s being redeveloped now because it’s been around for so long. But the constant reinvention of Cairns is the key to its success and Hemingway’s I think was a great example of that. Private investment, coming and reimagining a whole new part of that riverfront area. I met people, locals, people from other states, international visitors. Tremendous, great stuff.

INTERVIEWER: Please tell everybody. By the way, do you keep your finger on the pulse of tourism? I mean, you were involved up to your neck for years?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah I do because I know how important it is obviously to the country, particularly in regional areas. I’ve got to say, that’s one of the things that - I mean, Labor are proposing to get rid of the second year backpacker visa, if they’re elected. Now, I want Australians in Australian jobs, we all want that and that’s true. But you know, in places like Cairns we understand that that doesn’t always happen. If you don’t have the backpackers coming and being able to work in regional areas, whether it’s in the ag sector or the hospitality sector, particularly when you get further away out of Sydney and Melbourne, well that will have a devastating impact on the regional economy here. That’s lifeblood stuff.

So if you want a job in Cairns, you do not want to see that policy come to light with the election of a Labor government.

INTERVIEWER: Now we’ve got to get stuck into some of the matters of the day and of course there’s $60 million you’re pledging to build this so-called Cairns Tropical Enterprise Centre. We’re talking about tertiary hospital status. Talk to me about the benefits that can accrue from that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well 150 beds at Cairns hospital for a start. You know that means you won’t have to go south to get treatment and this is important. This is recognising the real status and needs of the local Cairns community in terms of the health services they expect and should get and will get under this plan. It’s being paid for, not with higher taxes, it’s being paid for by running a stronger economy. I know that others are proposing the same thing, but you know, they’re going to charge you for the privilege, some $200 billion in higher taxes over the next decade. So we don’t think that’s a good idea for the economy. We think you should be able to support these things by good, strong economic management and we see that here in Cairns and far north Queensland.

We’ve seen the youth unemployment rate here fall from 28 per cent to 15.6 per cent since the last election. That’s what happens when you run a strong economy. So the hospital project is very important for the local health needs but the other thing is this; Cairns is a tropical capital and not just for Australia but for our region. The tropical capital status extends not just from a tourism point of view but an economic point of view, a health and medicine point of view. I was out there at JCU yesterday, talking to the scientists cracking everything from dengue fever to tuberculosis. Also a really important project they’re running on Malaria and there were scientists there from Sri Lanka, from Germany and we’re bringing the world’s best here to study these things. That is going to be a real hub and so we’re excited about the 150 beds, but we’re also excited about what’s being built in terms of the health and medical research status of Cairns as a tropical centre for excellence in medicine.

INTERVIEWER: Do you know what we’re excited about up here? It’s the 48 day party to celebrate the 250th anniversary of James Cook and the Endeavour. Let me just read this from the Cairns post today, a likeness of the; “little old man whose gift of a broken spear to Captain Cook is considered Australia’s first act of reconciliation.” That’s going to be cast in bronze, that’s part of the $5.75 million infrastructure commitment to Cooktown from the Federal Government. They say you’re going to visit today, we know all about that.

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

INTERVIEWER: A whole lot of people, including myself, didn’t know the ins and outs of that first - not confrontation - it was a genuine expression of getting on together. It goes back 250 years, it’s a great story.

PRIME MINISTER: It is a great story and these are the stories we’re looking to be told with this re-enactment of that voyage. So yes, we’re putting around $5.5 million dollars in a lot of those projects which we’ve talked about, the Botanical Gardens in particular the initiative you’ve just mentioned. But 39 stops along the Australian east coast, that is going to be an opportunity for people to come, for tourists and it’s going to support local tourist industries and it’s also going to create the opportunity to refresh a lot of stories, things that people didn’t know, as you say.

So when Cook went into Cooktown - this is what Entschy tells me – Entschy tells me that the whole shipwreck thing was just an excuse, because they just wanted to come to North Queensland and go to Cooktown.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah, yeah.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: The historical record may say something different. But that was the most perilous part of Cook’s voyage, what happened there and their ability to be able to engage with local Indigenous peoples and have those stories was no doubt key to their survival at that time.

So I think it is a wonderful story. The view from the ship, the view from the shore, that’s what that re-enactment is all about. Telling Australian stories, engaging Australians, promoting tourism and it being a togetherness, I think, voyage.

INTERVIEWER: Do you know - I don’t know how old you were in 1988 - but when the big event, the ships around Australia, those beautiful sails when they came into the inlet the place was chock-a-block. So many people remember that day. There’s another voyage this time, it’s the replica Endeavour around the country, the voyage around the country, tell us about that?

PRIME MINISTER: As I was just mentioning, it’s 39 stops and we’re looking forward to that program and we’ve ensured it can go the full distance. It’s an opportunity for people to come along to each of those little towns and each of those ports. The National Maritime Museum is running this and who actually was responsible for the replica, I have been on the replica of the Endeavour because my electorate down in southern Sydney, Kurnell was the first place they stopped. The skipper for many years - I think he still is - he’s a local from Kurnell. The vessel itself is quite amazing when you wander around it and see what they actually crammed in there. I mean, Banks had the place stuffed full of botanical specimens and he had a few dogs on there and a few other things too. How they all squeezed in there, who knows.

But the thing about Cook is, I think we need to rediscover him a bit. Because he gets a bit of a bad show from some of those who like to trash our history.

INTERVIEWER: Yes, very fashionable now.

PRIME MINISTER: Very trendy to talk down James Cook and all that sort of stuff. But this guy was an enlightened man for his generation and his time. He was a scientist above anything else and he was fascinated with his engagement with the Indigenous peoples, whether it’s in Australia or whether it was in New Zealand or whether it was across the Pacific. Being able to tell the stories of how he was seeking to find understanding I think, is very important. I mean, it was a long time ago, 250 years ago and those people who want to try to judge people for what they did 250 years ago, you know I think that’s a bit harsh. I think you’ve got to try and look at him in the context of his time.

INTERVIEWER: Let’s go to a couple of serious matters now. Last time you were up here we had that incursion there up at the Daintree, people trying to get into Australia, the boat sank, you know the story. It’s a sensitive matter up here. We’re closer to the coalface that Sydney and Melbourne. So now we’re hearing about, well, the possibility of these people smugglers getting active again in Indonesia and Malaysia. Once again the commitment to keep our borders safe up here in the north?


PRIME MINISTER: Nothing will change under our Government because we know what we’re doing works. I know because I designed it and we put it in place. It was hard going, particularly over those first six months when we stopped the boats and what Bill Shorten and Labor don’t understand is how these things all work together.

See, they voted in the Parliament last year to basically get rid of offshore processing as we know it. They don’t even understand what they’ve done, they don’t even understand the implications. On top of that, they’re also going to abolish temporary protection visas. Now that’s two planks of the three plank strategy which stopped the boats and they have no appreciation of the impact that will have. There are over 10,000 people in Indonesia who will get on boats if they get the green light from the election of a Labor Government. Whether it’s here on the North Coast, north Queensland or across the top or out towards Christmas Island, that threat is ever present. We have held that line for the last five years and we must continue to hold that line. You’ve got to have the ticker and you’ve got to have the resolve to do it.

Kevin Rudd said he would turn back boats and what happened with that? The day, I remember it, it was 4 August 2008, the Labor Party abolished Temporary Protection Visas that were put in place by the Howard Government. That’s what started the madness.

INTERVIEWER: I want to take you to another matter basically it’s self-interest, but we are talking about the future of our port at Trinity Inlet. Now there has been a lot of talk about the expansion of Naval Facilities up there at Manus Island. You, the last week or so have been reported talking about bolstering our influence, if you like, out in the Pacific with the incursion more and more of Chinese interest there. Now talk to me about the potential, if indeed you’re going to be bolstering facilities up here, like naval facilities, will there be benefits for our port? Warren Entsch has been talking for some years now about the need for special facilities to be included here. We have been fighting for years to get a fair go as far as the future expansion where our port is concerned. What could be in store given the prospect of the expansion up at Manus, the need to support that and to support what you believe now is the need to bolster our influence out in the Pacific?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure, well, we have declared it a strategic port. That’s been done by Home Affairs and by Defence and I mentioned before about Cairns being a tropical capital - it’s a Pacific capital too for Australia’s engagement with the region. We’ll have the four Offshore Patrol Boats which will be serviced out of Cairns and while there is no current plans in front of us, proposals re: upgrading of some of that infrastructure, those issues will undoubtedly have to be dealt with. I think there is opportunity for private investment in that as well, because you create the critical mass once you once you have Offshore Patrol Boats being serviced out of here, that creates the capacity for marine-based industry to do even more. So we want to see the combination of those events between ourselves, the State Government and of course the private sector as well. So whether that’s in fisheries or whether that’s in other areas, we will see an expanded capability here, for Cairns to be a Pacific capital of Australia, a tropical capital of Australia.

Because I was in Vanuatu last week with Jenny and in Fiji and this is very important to our engagement with the Pacific. This is our part of the world. This is where we live. This is where we have those relationships and we have stepped up there and that has been incredibly well-received in the Pacific.

We have completely re-orientated our foreign aid programme and so we have been pulling money out of other places so we can invest it in our neighbours and our friends and our family. Vuvale is the word in Fijian, which some of your listeners I’m sure from Pacific extraction will know exactly what that means; it means family. It’s whanau in Polynesian, in Maori, and these are words that encapsulate the new relationship we’re having with the Pacific. While we have continued to invest in the Pacific, what we needed to step up is in our respect  and our engagement and that’s what I am doing. We have got a new head of an Office of the Pacific in the Department of Foreign Affairs, a fella called Ewen McDonald who has a long history in the region. He is coordinating our engagements right across everything from our cultural engagements - like rugby league and rugby union and netball and sports and all of those things because there are huge engagements between our sporting communities - but also right across to our defence and strategic operations. We just turned the sod on the Blackrock facility in Fiji which is training peacekeepers and humanitarian assistance for their defence forces and others in the region. So that is an exciting project, but it can all centre here. It can all centre here just like it can at JCU and the wonderful work they are doing on tropical medicine and tropical health.

INTERVIEWER: You used this term “strategic port status” I don’t know if it is going to be strong enough to unshackle the restraints on our need long term for dredging work. Now there is a smaller project underway at the moment, it’s about say a million cubic metres, a lot of people say we need a project of four and a half million cubic metres which was planned several years ago, but we have had our future there undermined. This “strategic port status” I think will not unshackle those restraints?

PRIME MINISTER: At the end of the day those calls will be made primarily made by State Government. Obviously the Commonwealth can’t just go in and override those decisions made by the State and this is why it does have to be a partnership. We see it as a strategic port, as a port of national significance in that context and you’re right John, it’s linked between here and the Pacific as a key part of why we believe that is so strategic.  

INTERVIEWER: Look we are miles ahead of time, we’ve still got a few minutes time so if you are at home listening this and you want to talk about boarder security or you want to talk about the about the Port,you if want can to ring through and talk with our Prime Minister directly, he hasn’t got a long time so it you want to have a chat get on the blower immediately.

PRIME MINISTER: All good.

INTERVIEWER: Can I take you to page one - and I know this is a sensitive matter, I know that, but let’s go to page one of the Australian. “Scott Morrison has urged the Indonesian President to show great respect to Australia in dealing with Abu Bakar Bashir the terrorist,” as survivors of the 2002 Bali bombings describe being quote, “disappointed and numb at the pending release of the spiritual leader of the Islamist group that killed 88 Australians.” I want you to have a listen to this, this came through on my program yesterday from a victim of the Bali bombing. I understand he lives in Perth.

INTERVIEWER: Peter Hughes is a survivor of the 2002 attack and says he is angry at the early release.

INTERVIEWER: He just hates Westerners. He just hates the way we are and he just loves the fact that they killed so many people and he was involved. 

INTERVIEWER: Now you have expressed already, can I say, disappointment in the release, the early release of Abu Bakar Bashir. What can you convey to the Indonesian leadership about our feelings on this sensitive matter here in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: First of all I want to assure all Australians that I have already conveyed directly, at the highest level, our strong views on this topic and the fact that Abu Bakar Bashir was convicted of crimes under the Indonesian justice system. It’s their justice system and they run it and so there are calls they have to make there. But 88 Australians were killed. This is an issue of very great significance to Australia, that has been conveyed. It was also Indonesians who were killed. I mean Abu Bakar Bashir is a threat to Indonesians as well as Australians and we have a counter-terrorism partnership with Indonesia and it is designed precisely to counteract the influences of radical Islamic clerics. So we are working very closely with the Indonesian Government at the moment and I appreciate that opportunity. We are heavily engaged, both myself directly as well as through our Head of Mission in Indonesia.

Two things are important; one is that respect must be shown for the lives of those who were lost.

INTERVIEWER: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: And it’s important that this character doesn’t get the opportunity to go and spread and incite hatred if under their system - and it’s their system - he were to be released. I would obviously be very disappointed about that, like other Australians would and would register that disappointment and quite strong feelings about that. But we don’t want this character able go out there and incite the killings of Australians and Indonesians preaching a doctrine of hate.

INTERVIEWER: Now this is a matter of some celebration up here I would imagine, this is from today’s Courier Mail the rate heart disease and premature death in North Queensland will be targeted under a $12 million Federal Government plan to send cardiology clinics to the bush. This is Greg Hunt, he’s revealing an extra mobile cardiac bus. More services are going to be sent to patients to ensure quicker intervention would save busy parents and workers from travelling to cities for timely care. This is part of a bid to help reverse the shocking health outcomes for regional and remote Queensland.

PRIME MINSITER: This is so important to rural and regional communities. Whether it’s this issue, whether it comes to cardiac conditions or frankly on mental health. One of the things I announced last year was over $50 million extra for Headspace and that was to provide and deliver remote mental health services to young people using digital and other online platforms.

Getting services to where people are, is becoming more possible though a lot of this technology. We were just talking about that JCU yesterday where that technology can be used to make diagnosis for people with tropical diseases, who you are unable to get to simply because their remote location or weather conditions. So we are making great strides here and I commend Greg Hunt on this initiative.

Sadly the state Government wouldn’t put a dime into this, they just completely rejected it. I mean this is part of the problem. We put $39 million, just in the last year, extra into the Cairns Hospital. On top of that, we’ve got the announcement which I’ve already mentioned, of $60 million. So, we’re getting on with and doing things, but I’ll tell you one thing I want do John; that is I’m not going to put taxes up on all Australians to pay for state governments who don’t know how to manage money. Whether it’s here with the Labor government in Queensland, we’re not going to just throw money at them so they can be absolved of their own funding responsibilities whether it’s for emergency departments or anything like that. That’s their responsibility. That’s why you pay state taxes, to fund those services. But also in the Northern Territory, you’ve seen the basket case of fiscal mismanagement there.

So we’re not going to use higher taxes on all Australians just because Labor can’t manage money.

INTERVIEWER: Look I’m glad you agreed to take a couple of calls, but we have to snappy or your staff will start waving at me and winding us up. We had John on the line, he’s not there yet. We’ve got Linda on the line. Linda, you’re talking to the Prime Minister Scott Morrison.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Linda.

INTERVIEWER: Good morning, good morning. One of the biggest issues that we’re facing in north Queensland and actually most of the northern part of Australia is insurance. You know it’s just crippling us here and we’ve been hearing about Senate inquiries and all sorts of inquiries, but there’s been no actual result. The flow-on effect is that our economy is going nowhere, it’s been going nowhere since the GFC which is a decade now.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah well there’s a couple of issues there. One of the issues Warren has raised with me about that is obviously the lack of competition. That’s a big problem. The other part of it is, as I understand it, the state strata laws prevent sometimes the type of insurance that you can get which would lead to a lower premium. He’s been raising that issue, which I think is very practical, I think the Assistant Treasurer Stuart Robert has been tasked and he’s been working on this with Warren and a lot of the north Queensland MPs, Matt Canavan and others, right now. I’ve got to say there is no simple solution, I mean when you’re in tropical, remote parts of the country, they’re obviously more exposed to more extreme weather events. That obviously has implications for how insurance is delivered and provided on a costly basis but I think you’re right about it, we’ve got to keep working on it in practical ways. But a bit more competition as Warren often says, would certainly be a good thing.

INTERVIEWER: Yeah the problem is, if we had the economy that was going and that we had jobs and we could create an income for ourselves, the problem itself we could almost manage. But the problem is because the economy has ground to a halt, you know, we hear constantly that we’re going to move a government department here or we’re going to dredge the channel, we’ve got this project that’s going to start, we’re going to have a tourism hub, we’re going to have all of this. We’ve been hearing it for so long but nothing has really happened. And you know, Cairns is the most beautiful place in the world to live, we’re so blessed to live here, but we have to make money.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure and that’s why I’m pleased that the youth unemployment rate here has fallen from 28 per cent to 15.6 per cent, just since the last election. The investments we’re making, whether it’s in JCU for their Innovation Hub, that’s already happening, that contract is secured, that funding is flowing. The $60 million we’ve just announced for the Tropical Enterprise Centre, that’s an important investment in jobs and the future of Cairns. There’s the investment that we put into the Aquarium as well as the Cultural Centre, there’s the road investments we’re making. I mean all of this and unemployment has been falling here in Cairns. That’s a good thing and it’s pleasing to see the Japanese market turning around a bit for local tourism, I’m pleased to see that the Chinese market has remained strong. You’ve got some very big investments now, coming in here from a very large international investor, three big projects happening here in Cairns. So you’re right - a strong economy is what is needed and that’s what we’re focused on.

INTERVIEWER: Linda we’ve got to move on because we’ve got almost no time, we’ve got Phil on the line. Phil, you’re talking to Prime Minister Scott Morrison.

INTERVIEWER: Hello Scott and thank you for giving the time to me. I prefer to call you Scott and ScoMo just by the way.

PRIME MINISTER: Whatever you like.

INTERVIEWER: I’ve been a follower, I’m not ashamed to say, I’m proud of the fact that I’ve followed the Liberals for a long time. I’ve always believed in your belief - that a bloke should go out and work hard and you’ll probably get reward for working hard. What really annoys me though, is the fact that – I read an article in the paper about eight months ago called ‘the underbelly of business’. Now fair enough, I believe what you believe, that every business is the backbone of Australia, that they hold the place alive and we’ve got to help them survive and promote them and give what we can to them. But if you’d read that article, you would have seen that there are a lot of businesses – and John Howard’s ideals were “work hard and provide money for your retirement,” and that’s what I’ve done – except superannuation has been made a lark of. When the small businesses – and there’s a hell of a lot of them, a lot – what Bill Shorten promises to do is tighten up on these businesses that aren’t paying their superannuation. They’re forgoing their superannuation funds, they’re using loopholes and saying: “I’m doing everything legally.” But they’re running people back tens of thousands of dollars. People are actually getting sick. They’re dying and the money is still owing to them.

INTERVIEWER: Alright.

INTERVIEWER: It’s just not fair.

PRIME MINISTER: Well two points on that, we’ve been taking action on that very point to ensure that these companies do pay their superannuation. We’ve been cracking down on that. But the other thing in terms of those self-funded retirees in particular, but all retirees including some pensioners - Labor’s plan is to strip you of your rebate for your franking credits, your dividend imputation. Where you get those imputation credits each year, whether you’ve got shares in the Commonwealth Bank, QANTAS or any of these other places, I know how important that is to the income of retired Australians. And those incomes will be hit hard by Bill Shorten’s retirees tax. It’s to the tune of thousands and there will be many people listening here who know that when Bill’s Tax Bus comes around, they will want to know; “Why are they going to be taxed more by Bill Shorten on their retirement savings?”

INTERVIEWER: We’ve got to move on because we’ve got little time and the queue starts at Mount Isa, we’ve got John on the line. John you’re talking to Scott Morrison.

INTERVIEWER: Good morning John, good morning Scott.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day John.

INTERVIEWER: Try to be brief.

INTERVIEWER: I’ll make it brief. We’ve been over-promised to buggery by Warren Entsch and there hasn’t been too much achieved, I’m not real happy with him, two things but – they’re probably ways to sort everyone’s worries; the flag, mate. I’d love to see someone introduce legislation to protect it from Indigenous and any other person who destroys it, urinates on it and burns it and all the rest of it. That’s one thing I’d like to see done. Is there any chance of you doing that?

PRIME MINISTER: First of all, on Warren, over his time here Warren has brought about $4 billion worth of public investments here into Leichhardt, the most recent being the one I’ve just announced yesterday. There’s the $10 million I announced when I was back here last November, there’s the Aquarium, there’s the Cultural Centre, it even goes back to the original boardwalk. I mean this is a bloke who has just been delivering and delivering and delivering, so with respect John, I can’t agree with your assessment. Warren Entsch has been one of the biggest deliverers of any local member anywhere in the country and he’s got a big passion to keep going too. That’s why I’m backing him so strongly. On the flag, I mean it’s the same reason that I feel so strongly about citizenship ceremonies or the way people conduct themselves; we’ve got to protect and respect our institutions. Whether it’s the flag, whether it’s citizenship, these are serious, serious things for Australia and you’ll always have my commitment to ensure that those institutions, whether its our flag, our system of government, our citizenship, these things should mean something and should never be treated with disrespect.

INTERVIEWER: John, we’ve got to move on I’m sorry, we’re right down on time. Scott just before you go – I’m getting dirty looks from your staff out there – this just got handed to me and it’s under the heading “Voters fund north Queensland fight against Medicare Centrelink privatization,” this is CPSU Queensland Assistant Regional Secretary Amy Smith: “We know that people living across north Queensland hugely value their local Medicare and Centrelink services and the decent quality jobs that exist to provide those essential services. That’s why ads are so important,” advertising, “to ensure voters are aware that these services and jobs are under threat from privatization and labour hire”?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, what a load of rubbish. I mean these are unions using union-members fees to promote Bill Shorten.  I mean if it’s not bad enough Bill Shorten wants to put his hand in your own pocket to rip more taxes out, the unions -  and militant unions, we had a whole bunch of those thugs out there yesterday at JCU, carrying on and screaming and shouting like they do all the time, I mean that’s no way to engage in any sort of civilized debate. But these union officials are using your union dues to go around pushing the Labor Party agenda. These are the facts; we have never had bulk-billing rates at the level we have them now. Medicare has been more secure and more guaranteed under our Government than ever before, including here in north Queensland, where bulk-billing rates are not only higher than the national average, they’re higher than the Queensland average. So, bulk-billing has been secure, $39 million extra into our local hospitals here in Cairns and the state Labor Government cut $600,000. You’ll find similar stories down in Hervey Bay, in Gladstone. I note that Bill Shorten is down in Gladstone today, he’s going to make some announcement down there, the only thing people in Gladstone need to know and north Queensland, is that Bill Shorten’s reckless energy targets on emissions is going to wipe out the Boyne aluminium smelter. That’s 1,000 jobs gone Bill. 1,000 jobs gone, on the basis of a vapor of a promise from a bloke that can’t run an economy. Give me a break.

INTERVIEWER: Your staff are on the verge of mutiny here so I’m going to let you go.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we’ve got to get up to Cooktown.

INTERVIEWER: Well exactly!

PRIME MINISTER: I’m looking forward to that.

INTERVIEWER: Have you met Peter Scott up there?

PRIME MINISTER: Not yet, looking forward to it.

INTERVIEWER: He’s doing a wonderful job and the other thing I’d love you to do up there if you get half an hour, go to the museum. It is such an eye-opener and you will just love what is on offer up there. You’ll be looking forward to that 48 day celebration next year.

PRIME MINISTER: I will.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison, Prime Minister of Australia, thank you for your time in studio today.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks John, great to be here with you.

PRESENTER: ScoMo, how are you?

PRIME MINISTER: Good, Shad and Carly, it’s great to be back here and with you guys again today. We’ve had a great couple of days up here in Far North Queensland and thanks to all those who gave us such a warm welcome.

PRESENTER: Now more importantly, how is the first pup, Buddy, doing?

PRIME MINISTER: Buddy is doing great, he has made a number of appearances. When we had the Australian and Indian cricket teams around on New Year's Day, he took to howling every time Kohli spoke and he got himself on the news that night. But he was quite a hit with the entire Indian cricket team, I’ve got to say, as he was with the Aussies. Buddy is doing great.

PRESENTER: Can we chuck him on the team, because I think we’re struggling a little bit out in the field.

PRIME MINISTER: He’s a pretty good fielder, he gets after those quick ones towards the boundary I think. Very, very fast.

PRESENTER: Now, you’re also here for a big announcement around Cooktown and Captain Cook’s voyage around Australia. ScoMo, what is going on?

PRIME MINISTER: It’s an important part of our history and up in Cooktown, they’ll tell you all about it. I mean, if you go back to that day when they called him the ‘little old man” who came out of the bushes with the rest of his mates and they reconciled with Cook over a dispute that they’d had, it’s a beautiful story. And these stories are important about reconciliation in Australia, and they’ve been doing this in Cooktown for 60 years. So the voyage that will go up along the east coast of Australia, which is what Cook did obviously, so there’s a re-enactment element to that and Captain Cook is a big part of that, he’s a big part of the far north coast and Far North Queensland. It’s a big part of our tourism sector as well and I want to see those stories told. I’m proud of Australia’s history. I see Bill Shorten is out there today, he is sneering at Australia’s history today. This is the problem, he sneers from behind his...

PRESENTER: Can I just be honest here, ScoMo. I was questioning whether this Government’s priorities lie, because as a woman in this country living through a domestic violence epidemic, coming fresh off the back of the latest horrific crime that has happened against a woman, I was waiting to hear kind of the next move on that and then this kind of come out of left field. You know, then we’ve got what’s happening down you know in New South Wales with the Murray Darling and this just seemed to come out of left field and a lot of people were going where is this Government’s head at, why is this funding going towards this when we have way more pressing issues going on in this country?

PRIME MINISTER: We can do more than one thing at a time. We’re investing...

PRESENTER: I understand that, but it’s priorities.

PRIME MINISTER: $350 million to combat domestic violence. That’s what we’re doing on domestic violence. Almost half a billion dollars to invest in the Reef, we’ve announced further work that we’re doing on the Murray Darling Basin. All these things are happening at the same time. But focus on the things that matter Carly, and it’s good for you to raise the things that do matter.

PRESENTER: Well I hope so, because we want to keep you accountable, we are all voters.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

PRESENTER: And as a woman in this country, as a woman that watches these news reports time and time again, I just hope that this epidemic is really being taken seriously.

PRIME MINISTER: We have had three national action plans now on countering domestic violence in Australia. That’s been $350 million, we’re going to announce the fourth one. Now I was down in Melbourne on the weekend and I took my daughters and my wife and we went along and we went to the memorial for Aiia down there - I know there has also been a terrible murder here up in Far North Queensland as well - and I met Aiia’s father. I reached out to him and we had a private meeting that afternoon and, you know, as one dad to another, what do you say? I’m a father of two girls. The women of my life have been everything in my life and I fear for them as well, but in these horrific attacks, they start with disrespect of women. Disrespect of women doesn’t always, as Malcolm Turnbull used to say, doesn’t always end in that violence but it’s certainly where it starts. And that’s why respect for women is incredibly important and that’s why we’ll continue to invest in domestic violence initiatives and I really don’t want to see that issue - I’m not suggesting you are saying this, either - I don’t want to see that politicised at all. Because there is, I think, a bipartisan commitment to address domestic violence in this country. I don’t question any other MP’s commitment to that and I would be very disappointed if any other MP did likewise to another.

PRESENTER: Well, now we’ve covered the big topics, that got a lot more heated. Can we do the fun now? Let’s have some fun, ScoMo.

[Inaudible]

What I want to know is, and we were having a discussion about this in the office, what’s the toilet situation for MPs? Is there like a big group urinal area? You’re the PM, does Malcolm give you the keys to the fancy throne? What’s the sitch?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there is one in every MPs office.

PRESENTER: So they’ve all got their own?

PRIME MINISTER: They do.

PRESENTER: So there’s no joint urinal?

PRIME MINISTER: Well if you’re walking around the building, yeah there are those as well. And you can often have a quiet conservation.

PRESENTER: Is that where some of the secrets are all done?

PRIME MINISTER: There’s often the odd chat.

PRESENTER: Do you ever look?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: No.

PRESENTER: Oh everyone has had a look?

PRIME MINISTER: No, no.

PRESENTER: Just a peek, just a little, even an accidental look.

PRIME MINISTER: I think you’re sort of self-revealing there, mate.

PRESENTER: Has anyone ever looked at you?

PRIME MINISTER: I hope not.

[Laughter]

PRESENTER: What about Bill Shorten, have you ever...

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: No, we’ve never actually found ourselves in that situation to the best of my recollection. He’s probably as thankful for that as me.

PRESENTER: Because if you were yelling at each other across the thing and you know, it’s kind of like, it almost gives you a little bit of a prop up doesn’t it?

It’s the ultimate political move, the ultimate power play.

PRIME MINISTER: I think we’ve got to keep you out of Parliament House.

[Laughter]

And if you do see Shad, cover up.

PRESENTER: If you see me walking the halls of Canberra, I’m having a look. Go to the cubicle.

I do often wonder this, about you and Bill, because obviously you’re both doing a job and obviously that job requires you to be constantly in this debate against each other. But is that a personal thing? Would you have… if he invited you around for a barbeque, would you accept the invite?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh look, Bill and I, many years ago, before we were in politics, we travelled to Israel together on a joint delegation.

PRESENTER: Really?

PRIME MINISTER: Many years ago. And there are some pretty embarrassing photos of, you know...

PRESENTER: Got a bit loose, did you?

PRIME MINISTER: Ah no, more because we were… our wardrobes back then were a little different to what they are today.

[Laughter]

PRESENTER: And we both had a bit of a tease of each other about that. But look, politics is a serious business and you respect people professionally. Doctors disagree with each other, lawyers disagree with each other. Professional respect is always important/.

PRIME MINISTER: So would you go to the barbeque?

PRESENTER: I mean, Chloe and Jenny get on quite well, actually, because they’re conscripts to what Bill and I do.

PRESENTER: My last question for you - might have more after that though - is there a red phone in your office that you’re afraid if it rings?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: No there’s not.

PRESENTER: There’s no such thing as that?

PRIME MINISTER: There’s not. There’s one phone, and it’s this one, and it rings all the time.

[Laughter]

But you know, if Jen’s name comes up, obviously, or the girls - well they don’t have phones - but if Jen’s phone comes up, that’s the one that gets answered.

PRESENTER: That’s the one you answer straight away.

PRIME MINISTER: Not all the time, I’ve got to say, on occasion I have… that’s been raised with me on occasion.

[Laughter]

PRESENTER: Well ScoMo, it’s been a pleasure having you in the studio this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks guys.

PRESENTER: Good luck with running the country.

PRIME MINISTER: Well look, we’re getting stuff done, the economy is going well, but there is a lot of… you know, this year is going to be a tough year in the economy, so we can’t take this stuff for granted. And that’s my number one priority, because it pays for everything else.

PRESENTER: 100 per cent. Well don’t forget, make sure some of that money keeps coming up here.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: Well as you can see, Entschy has nailed that for a long time.

PRESENTER: He kills it, he is a very tall human being as well. He intimidates me every time he steps into studio. Alright, thanks.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you, thanks Shad, thanks Carly.

INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison, welcome to ABC Far North Queensland.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Kier, it's great to be here in the studio and great to be here in Cairns again.

INTERVIEWER: Now an election is clearly in the air when the Prime Minister comes to town bearing gifts. You brought some money for the tertiary stage of the Hospital project here in Cairns, heading to Cooktown today. What can they expect?

PRIME MINISTER: Well as you say, this is not my first visit to Cairns. I’ve been here many times and last time I was here last year it was $10 million for the innovation hub out there at JCU. Yesterday, you’re right, we announced $60 million to free up 150 beds, 150 new beds at the Hospital, but which also sees the great work of JCU and their Tropical Medicine Centre continue on, that’s fantastic.

We’re heading up to Cooktown today, it’s the 250th anniversary of the voyage of then Lieutenant James Cook who he went on to be Captain James Cook. He stopped in two places along the east coast. One was in my electorate of Cook down there in southern Sydney in Kurnell and the other one - a much longer stay as Warren Entsch reminds me all the time -  up here in north Queensland, he maintains he had a much better time. So I’m looking forward to going up there. There’s a lot of excitement about that 250th anniversary and we’re investing in a range of local projects, upgrades for tourist infrastructure, parks, these sorts of things, which commemorate those events. But also announcing the voyage, the re-enactment of the voyage that will call in all around the east coast of Australia for the 250th anniversary. That’ll be great for tourism and it’ll also be a great opportunity just to talk about our history; the view from the shore, the view from the ship and very much understanding those two stories like we do in my home electorate every year, with our meeting of two cultures ceremony on the 29th of April. I think this voyage will provide an opportunity to tell those shared stories.

INTERVIEWER: And the money that you’re bringing for them, around $5.75 million I understand?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, it’s about that for both projects.

INTERVIEWER: And do you know what the money will be spent on?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, the $5.8 million that we’re spending up in Cooktown, that includes the reconciliation of the Rocks Precinct, the development of the Botanical Gardens, the upgrades to the Gamaay Dreaming Track and the Waymburr Story Project. There’s a range of those local projects that will help people when they go to that part of the country to be able to learn the stories, understand the stories from both an indigenous perspective and from an European perspective. I think that’s one of the things people love coming from Australia to do; to understand our stories. We’ve got great stories and some of them are hard, some of them are magnificent, but we’ve got to tell them all.

INTERVIEWER: As you fly to Cooktown today you’re going to be flying over the world heritage listed Daintree Rainforest. Now, there was a Federal Parliamentary Committee last year that recommended the Bloomfield Track be sealed. Now this is a section of track that runs through that rainforest and there have been plenty of people involved in the initial fight to get it listed 30 years ago on the world heritage list, saying that it shouldn't happen. So should the Federal Government be investing money in conservation of the area rather than development of the area?

PRIME MINISTER: We’re proceeding cautiously here. Warren and I had a good discussion about this, as well as with some locals. There is nothing immediately proceeding there, protecting those conservation values is incredibly important, but also providing the opportunity for people to experience these incredible areas. I mean, the two have to be done together. I know there are a lot of different views here in the community about what needs to be done there, so we’ll keep listening.

INTERVIEWER: Okay you have personally supported the coal industry, people might remember you bringing that piece of coal into Parliament on that occasion a few years ago?

PRIME MINISTER: Well coal creates lots and lots and lots of jobs.

INTERVIEWER: Sure, now in our area though, reef, rainforest, many environmentally sensitive assets as well. Do you think the Government’s approach to environment, to climate change, could potentially cost votes in Leichhardt?

PRIME MINISTER: No I don’t, because we’re meeting our commitments, we’ve set our commitments. We met Kyoto 1, we will comfortably smash Kyoto 2 and I believe we will meet 2030 our targets there which we have set. I’ve reassured Pacific leaders about that just last week as well. We have plans to achieve it, we will achieve it. The thing about Australia and our commitments on emissions reductions is we actually make them and achieve them. You know, I don’t go around talking about them every day, we just go around doing them every day and make sure we achieve them.

So we’ve got those programs in place, we will continue and we share the concerns about the impacts of climate change, not just about addressing its causes but also addressing its impacts her right around our region in particular, where those impacts can be more severe. But also in supporting scientific research that we have up here into the Reef. I mean, the Reef is both one of our most amazing environmental assets and it’s a livelihood for a large number of Australians, particularly living up here in Queensland and managing and balancing those interests is important. But I believe everybody’s job is important, whether it’s working in the mining sector, whether it’s working in the environmental sector, whether it’s working in hospitals, whether it’s working in small business. All of their jobs are important and I want to keep them in all of their jobs.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, so in the Leichhardt fight, Warren Entsch is going up against a female candidate. Do you have enough women running in winnable seats across the country?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I’d always like more. What I want though is the best people to continue to take on the task that we have set ourselves.

Over the last five and a half years we have created over a million jobs as a Government and we’ve had record growth in youth jobs. I mean here alone, in Leichhardt in this part of Australia, we have seen the youth unemployment rate fall from 28 per cent to 15.6 per cent since the last election. Now that’s great news, that’s great news for parents who are worried about their kids getting jobs, it’s great news for people coming out of school. The strength of our economy here supported - not just I should say by the tourism industry and hospitality industry which has always been key to this part of Australia - but the growing and burgeoning health sector, human services sector. This is why we have been investing in James Cook University. I mean this is a tropical capital, not just for Australia but for the region.

INTERVIEWER: But do you have enough women running in winnable seats?

PRIME MINISTER: I’d like to have more.

INTERVIEWER: You say you’d like to have more, so that means you don’t think you have enough.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we have our candidates set as we go in and we’ve got a strong female representation and there are more seats to fill between now and the next election. You know, we've got six women in my Cabinet, that’s the highest number under our Government and they are all very capable women and doing a fantastic job.

But you know what’s important for women? That the gender pay gap has actually fallen to its lowest level on record. That the female workforce participation is at its highest level in record. That we’ve been addressing the cost of childcare, that we’re investing $350 million already in addressing domestic violence as we move forward to our fourth action plan to do just that. Keeping women safe, keeping women having economic choices and opportunities. I want more women to have more choices in life. Many are trying to create those choices themselves and can feel frustrated. I want to be able to break through that barrier so they can live the life that they choose to live.

INTERVIEWER: Jeff Kennett - the oft outspoken Mr Kennett -

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah Jeff’s always good for some advice.

INTERVIEWER: He suggested that people like Kevin Andrews and Julie Bishop should be stepping aside to let new talent come through, potentially some of those new women into winnable seats, potentially. Does he have a point?

PRIME MINISTER:  I like the blend of experience. Take Warren. I mean, Warren has been so central, Warren Entsch, in the development of Cairns to what it is today and North Queensland. I mean over his time – and I’m not just talking about big road projects and things like this – he told me yesterday, over $4 billion worth of investment he’s been able to shepherd into this part of the country. He is both a champion for north Queensland and a great mentor to many of my colleagues, particularly those new ones who are coming in. Like Senator Amanda Stoker, she’s our most recent member coming in for Queensland, taking up from where George Brandis went out. So, a bloke out and a highly talented woman coming in. You’ve got someone like Amanda, full of passion and full of vision for the future, you’ve got people like Warren who have got experience and the burning passion still and a plan for north Queensland. That’s why I just back Warren in, because he knows what to do here, because he’s so connected.

INTERVIEWER: Speaking of Julie Bishop, she’s talked about potentially re-contesting as well. Have you spoken to her about that and in fact, would there be a position for her on your front bench?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I offered her one when I became Prime Minister and she decided she didn’t want to proceed with it at that time, so I respect her decision. I respect her choice, she’ll make her choices and I’ll respect those choices. She’s said she’s intending to run and she’s pre-selected and she’s running out there now, that’s what she’s said on the record.

INTERVIEWER: Okay let’s just turn our attention to the current sort of crisis happening on the Murray-Darling Basin as well. That idea that Labor is now going to work with those independent scientists, that plan that Bill Shorten put forward. The Government have knocked back a request essentially for you to be involved in supporting the particular program. Why?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s just politics, I mean the Murray-Darling Basin Plan is a very serious and sensitive issue. It’s been a bipartisan initiative for many, many years. David Littleproud – as your listeners may have heard being interviewed on AM just before this program, was working closely with Tony Burke. I mean the scientific evidence and research that is currently forming the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, was actually done under Labor. Now I’m not criticizing that work, we were using that work that they did and we’ve worked in a cooperative and bipartisan way.

Now an election comes up and Bill Shorten wants to take advantage. I just think that’s the wrong way to approach it. We will be taking advice from the experts and we’ll continue to do that. The Minister will have more to say about that today. But on top of that, as you can see, the meetings have taken place between the environmental license-holders and the water-managers. The New South Wales Government are the ones who manage the water flows in that part of the country and we’ll work closely to support them as well. But it’s a very serious issue and I know it’s very distressing.

INTERVIEWER: So are you worried about what the scientists might discover?

PRIME MINISTER: No I’m not at all, I’d like to be informed by the work that we will do. But I’m not going to engage in those sort of theatrics from Bill Shorten. I mean you just can’t trust him with this stuff, he always flicks the switch to the politics on this. We’ve had such good bipartisanship on this and he just wants to turn it over for political purposes and I find that very disappointing.

INTERVIEWER: Let’s talk a little bit just about the impending election as well. I mean just a few days of Parliament left, the delivery of a Budget and calling the election. What are the priorities in this short time frame that we have leading up to the next election?

PRIME MINISTER: You’re right we will have a Budget, we’ll hand down a Budget on the 2nd of April. It will be the first surplus Budget this country has seen in 12 years. This will be very important for the country and we’ve been pulling this Budget back now over the last five years.

I think one of the big questions in this election is, in 2007 the country decided to go to Labor, to go to Kevin Rudd; we have spent the last ten years fixing that. What they did to the Budget, what they did to the borders, what they did to social welfare and it’s expansion and welfare dependency increasing,  we’ve turned all that around over the last five years. So we’ve spent five years cleaning up Labor’s mess.

We want to now get on with the plans for a stronger economy, because you know, if you don’t have a stronger economy, you can’t afford health care, you can’t afford these schools. The reason I can come and announce $60 million for Cairns Hospital here, is because we’ve got a stronger economy.

Bill Shorten will come up here and he’ll say the same thing, but he’s taxing you more for it. He’s going to use federal higher taxes, to subsidise the Labor State Government that can’t manage money. Now I’m not going to do that, I’ll hold state governments to account, not throw money at them when they can’t manage their Budgets, so they want to throw in money from ours. They need to do their job, we need to do our job and we’ll get on with managing the nations’ finances so we can provide lifesaving drugs like we announced for lung cancer on the weekend; $96 million for lifesaving lung cancer drugs. Drugs that help people have a quality of life. I met a patient, Bruno, who has been on it for the last two and a half years, three young kids - $96 million means that an $8,000 script is now going to cost $40.30. That’s why I believe in a stronger economy and that’s why it’s my number one priority, along with keeping Australians safe and keeping Australians together.

INTERVIEWER: We’ve had a few callers ringing in as well, asking about ABC funding. These are people from more regional locations as well, who aren’t serviced by as many other media outlets. So they’re just asking, what is your take on the ABC funding? Would you have plans to restore it, would you have plans to lessen it more?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it doesn’t need to be restored because it hasn’t been cut, it’s funding is not going backwards it’s actually being maintained. But I particularly want to commend the work the regional ABC does. I mean from my Liberal and National parliamentary colleagues who represent regional electorates, I know that they greatly value the work that the ABC does in regional parts of the country. It’s great to have a local regional host here in Cairns, that’s fantastic as well. I think the services it provides here in regional areas is outstanding.

INTERVIEWER: But there has been a reduction?

PRIME MINISTER: No there hasn’t.

INTERVIEWER: There hasn’t been? In real terms?

PRIME MINISTER: There’s been no reduction in funding. I mean we asked the ABC to actually do the same thing that every single Department and agency has to do in terms of an efficiency dividend, which they weren’t required to do for years and years and years. So that’s what impacts on the forward estimates, but the ABC gets a good budget, it gets a strong budget and it does a good job with that budget. But you know if I have to choose between financing and supporting lung cancer drugs and some other opportunities, guess what I’m going to choose? $60 million for the hospital in Cairns.

INTERVIEWER: So Prime Minister, can I ask about the Australia Day stuff?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

INTERVIEWER: It’s coming up this weekend, you’re going to be out there in far north Queensland in the heat and the humidity. You know you’ve made those propositions about maintaining it - being when Councils can actually do the ceremonies – this idea of actually banning shorts, thongs, these sorts of ideas, why legislation like that? Why spending time on stuff like that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s not legislation, it’s part of code. What I’m saying is, I used to be the Immigration Minister, you know, it’s my signature on many Australians’ citizenships today. I had someone who bumped into me at Kakadu the other day actually, they mentioned that to me, they wanted to say g’day. I just want the ceremony to be treated with respect. I’ve been to many, many of these ceremonies around the country and the vast majority of new Australians who become Australians on the day, do just that. But just dress appropriately, is my point. Don’t come looking like you just got out of bed, that’s not showing respect.

Citizenship is the most important gift a country can give anyone. Now I wouldn’t turn up to my kids’ graduation in thongs and boardies, I wouldn’t do that. I’d certainly be wearing that at the party afterwards or at the barbeque or down at the beach, of course I’d do that. But this is an important institution. Citizenship should be respected and it’s about respect for your fellow citizens who are becoming citizens on that day, as well as respect for the institution itself. So look, it’s a commonsense rule, I think there should be a standard and I think people want standards for things like that.

INTERVIEWER: Well Prime Minister I know you need to leave so we do appreciate your time this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: No worries.

INTERVIEWER: Enjoy your trip to Cooktown as well and we’ll be hearing more from you as you deliver your announcements there today. And I’m sure we’ll see you again right?

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot, I look forward to it.

INTERVIEWER: Can you put us out of our misery - everyone has to ask you at the end right – when will the election be Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: After the Budget.

INTERVIEWER: After the Budget, okay that’s pretty fair.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s not too bad?

INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Okay and well done to the Taipans last night, cheers.

INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister, good afternoon.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day Ben, happy new year to you and all your listeners.

INTERVIEWER: You’re back into it.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah well and truly, I’ve been back into it for quite a while now and we’re up here in Cairns. We’ve made an announcement about some new hospital funding up here which has been well received. People who live in regional areas should be able to get medical treatment in regional areas. That’s what we believe, so we’re funding that from a stronger economy, not higher taxes like Bill on his tax bus.

INTERVIEWER: We spoke at the end of last year and I know that you were looking forward to having a little bit of time with your family as much as you could. Did you get a few weeks, how much time did you actually get to down tools and enjoy the family?

PRIME MINISTER: We got a week off, we went down to Shoalhaven heads and I bumped into Mark Leavy actually, he was there.

INTERVIEWER: I saw that, I saw a photo of you and ‘Piggy’ Riddell as well.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah they were down there, it was great. Shoalhaven Heads is a top spot, it’s sort of people from all walks of life and we had a great time down there and they had a big, the fishing club, had a huge fundraising afternoon so the family and I and friends went down and enjoyed that and they raised a bit of money for the local rural fire service and the surf club and so on. So you know, it was just Australia on holiday and it was great to be a part of it.

INTERVIEWER: I know we’re speaking to you because you’re the Prime Minister but I need to ask you a question this afternoon as Cronulla’s number one ticket holder. Coach Shane Flanagan has resigned today, he was deregistered for contacting the club while serving a ban related to players using performance enhancing drugs. Was it appropriate today for him to fall on his sword?

PRIME MINISTER: Well Shane sent me a text actually and let me know he was doing this. I know Shane pretty well and look, Shane always puts the club first. He puts his players first, he puts our community first. Shane, you know, lived his entire married life in the Shire and raised three great kids and he has been so good for our community. I just want to thank Shane for everything he has done for the club. Brought out first Premiership, of course, but he did so much more than that. Things like Make Bullying History, Red Cross, he has just been such a champion bloke. Now I will let the NRL sort out all the other stuff, I’m not going to adjudicate on that, that’s not my job. But I think today is a day to say thank you to Shane and I’m standing with Shane, that’s for sure, and I hope he’s got a role in the game in the future because he is a great coach and he is a great bloke.

INTERVIEWER: If I can get you to put your other hat on right now as Prime Minister, the former Prime Minister Tony Abbott told my colleague Ray Hadley today here on 2GB that “people would be better off voting Labor rather than an Independent”, he said, “because for all of Labor’s faults, at least they are a Party of government or potential government. Now, I know that you would prefer people vote for the Liberal Party or the National Party but do you agree with Mr Abbott that a vote for Labor is better than a vote for an Independent?

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t think you should vote for either of them. That’s my view, that’s my very strong view. Because neither of them can deliver a stronger economy, neither of them can provide what Australians need. Bill Shorten want to put $200 billion of new taxes on the Australian economy. That’s not going to help it. If you’re running a small business or work for one, how do you think that’s going to impact your business? $200 billion of higher taxes on the Australian economy. It’s a bad idea. So I’m sorry to disagree with Tony, I don’t think you should vote for either of them and I suspect Tony agrees with me on that too.

INTERVIEWER: There seems to be a lot more detail coming out about what this is going to do, some of Bill Shorten’s changes when it comes to tax. Whether it be relating to retirement or relating to negative gearing, there seems to be a lot more detail that’s coming out in the lead-up to the next election. Is that going to be what you need to get across the line?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’re just going to make that point really clear Ben and you’re right. I mean, people have always had their question marks over Bill Shorten. He has been their leader for the last five and a half years and people haven’t warmed to him. Now they’re also seeing that his policies are equally as damaging. $200 billion worth of taxes, I mean that includes taxes on housing, that’s taxes on investments, that’s taxes on people’s retirement savings, it’s taxes on their income, it’s taxes on their small businesses. It’s just tax, tax, tax, tax, tax. And that is what Bill Shorten is doing. Because he can’t manage his own budget so he is going to take money out of your budget. And that’s why he can’t be trusted. And I care about health services, we’re up here announcing $60 million for the Cairns hospital. But I’m paying for that from a stronger economy, not by putting people’s taxes up.

INTERVIEWER: Did I hear you right that you said that people haven’t warmed to him?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah that’s a very polite and kind way of putting it.

INTERVIEWER: Have they warmed to you? I mean you’ve been out and about over the summer break, do you get the feeling that Australia is now used to Scott Morrison being their Prime Minister and they like it?

PRIME MINISTER: Well that’ll be ultimately tested at the election and that’s for them to make those commentaries, not be. But I’ve been very appreciative of the kind reception I’ve had wherever I have gone. People are always very respectful to their Prime Minister, whoever that is, and I think that’s nice and I appreciate that. But mate, I know one person they’re warming to and that’s Jenny. They’re loving Jenny.

INTERVIEWER: Well that’s nice to know.

[Laughter]

Now let me ask you about Kelly O’Dwyer. She announced last week, one of your senior ministers, that she will be leaving Parliament at the upcoming election for family reasons and we wish her well on that front. I see today that Victorian Premier, former Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett has sent a bit of a message to some long-serving Liberal MPs like Julie Bishop and Kevin Andrews, suggesting that they should leave Parliament and make way for some fresh talent. What do you think of Jeff Kennett’s advice?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, Jeff can make those comments. But I actually quite like the fact that we’ve got a blend of experience and new people in the team. I mean, I’m up here in Queensland, I’m up in Warren Entsch’s electorate. Now Warren has delivered season in, season out for the people of North Queensland and he is a great mentor to other members of our team. But then you’ve got people like Senator Amanda Stoker, who has just come in at the last election and she is doing a great job in Queensland as well. So it’s a great mix. You need youth, you need talent, but you also need experience. Now, the individuals in terms of Julie or Kevin or others, I mean they’ll make their calls. Julie has made her statement. But everyone has got a role to play, whether you’re older or you’re younger, you’re male or you’re female. All this identity politics, frankly, is getting a bit tiring.

INTERVIEWER: I got a few messages today when I promoted the fact that you were going to be calling in, from political journos who said, “Oh look, Scott Morrison kind of dodged a question today about Julie Bishop and when people asked whether or not she was going to run at the next election you said I refer you to her statement.” I have had a look at her statement, she said I am preselected as the Member for Curtin and it is my intention to run so, I’m guessing you don’t have a guarantee from Julie Bishop that she is going to run?

PRIME MINISTER: That’s just what she told you herself. That’s what she said, that’s what her public statement is and that’s a matter for Julie. I would love Julie to continue to remain but if she wants to do something else that’s up to her. But she’s been very consistent in saying she intends to run at the next election and good for her. Julie has got an enormous amount of experience. I have been in the Pacific bolstering our relationships there, particularly with Fiji over the last couple of days and she did a great job as Foreign Affairs Minister. She was an outstanding one and she was our Deputy Leader for 11 years so she has got a lot to offer.

INTERVIEWER: The images that we saw over the summer break, and I know you’ve commented on this but I haven’t had the chance to talk to you about this. All of those fish in the Darling River, the Australian Academy of Science is now preparing a report for your opposite number Bill Shorten. He is going to present a report to Parliament on this. I know there is still an argument about why the fish are dead, is it the drought, is it poor river management, is it both? Is it something else, what’s your take on the catastrophe that we saw there in the Darling River?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, we’re listening to the experts and I understand that they’ve made it very clear that it’s not a million, that’s not a factual report, it’s in the thousands. And that’s still a great tragedy and something that I know Australians find deeply upsetting. We’ve convened those meetings of managers of the water flows and the environmental licence holder, they’re providing some advice. We’ve put $5 million down to support the native species fish regeneration and they’re issues of drought, they’re issues of management, and you’ve just got to work methodically through these issues. But the other thing you’ve got to do Ben is… the Murray Darling Basin Plan has been a bipartisan initiative for a long time, and that’s one of the reasons why we can all work together to provide the certainty and stability in how you manage the plan. Now, people playing politics with this I don’t think is very helpful for the Murray Darling Basin Plan and I don’t intend to do it. Now, the Labor Party back in 2012, they did a scientific report which has informed the plan and what we’re doing now, I’m not making any criticisms of that, I’m not throwing any stones at that. So I would just encourage Bill Shorten to actually stay on the main game here and that is to ensure that we maintain a bipartisan approach to how we manage this very sensitive issue. I do not want to see this become some sort of political football before the election. It’s too important, and we should just work professionally and carefully, listen to the experts, make the right decisions and work particularly with the New South Wales Government which has primary responsibility for managing water flows in that area.

INTERVIEWER: I have spoken to, in the first hour of our program today, a mate of ours Jamie Warden who is a farmer in Walgett. He was saying the rivers are drying up around Walgett as well, there’s algae growing around rivers there. He is worried about a similar thing happening where they are and he also said, ‘Look, we’ve got many band aid measures that have happened as far as drought is concerned but we still don’t hear those long-term plans are far as drought-proofing.” I know that you made this your number one priority when you became PM.

PRIME MINISTER: Well we’ve announced half a billion dollar water infrastructure fund. We’ve invested in farm water management with the major tax incentives and major financial support for water infrastructure on farms. We’ve provided a million for every single council in every shire in drought affected areas and that money is rolling out now. We’ve provided $30 million to support the charitable sector to ensure they can get funds directly into those areas where they know it’s most important and we’ve been coordinating through Major General Stephen Day to ensure that each of those charities are coordinating so we’re not doubling up and we’re directing the resources. The Drought Summit last year, that was very successful and we’ve re-negotiated the Drought Agreement between the states and the territories and the Commonwealth, we concluded that at the end of last year. So there has been a lot of activity there.

INTERVIEWER: Sadly, it doesn’t always flow through. The money doesn’t always flow through and I don’t expect you to be able to do anything about this and it’s a very specific case but Jamie has just taken us through Walgett, for example, where you’ve got money that’s been given to the council for a weir or an artesian board to help out with water supply and the council still hasn’t spent the money. I mean, sometimes you can hold the summits and you can hand out the cheques and whatever but it doesn’t always translate into water for the farmers though.

PRIME MINISTER: Well whether it’s water cartage or things like that but I do know those $1 million is getting to those councils and the Commonwealth Government has been working closely with those councils so they can get it ready. And of course there is the $5 billion water future fund that I announced at the Budget, sorry at the Summit, and that is now… we’re taking that through to establish that fund through the legislation and that means there will be funding there for capacity on water management into the future for generations. This is a water future fund. So a lot is being done there, but I can’t make it rain but we can do these things that we’re doing now and Major General Stephen Day our Drought Coordinator sends me a message every single night on the actions that he is taking and the places that he’s going and the people he’s talking to and we continue to listen and act each day.

INTERVIEWER: There has been a terrible spate of suicides in Indigenous communities. We have had five teenage girls taking their lives in two weeks. I saw a statistic today that only 5 per cent of the nation’s children are Aboriginal but they account for 40 per cent of youth suicides and we’ve got a long way to go, don’t we, when it comes to closing the gap between the lives of black and white Australians, don’t we?

PRIME MINISTER: Ben, you are absolutely right. And mate, I saw those same reports as I’m sure you did over the break and I’m not pleased you’ve raised it for the obvious reasons but I am glad you’ve raised it, if you know what I mean. It’s important that we know what you’ve just said and that has been and continues to occur in Indigenous communities and particularly girls taking their lives. Now, I spoke to Nigel Scullion the Indigenous Affairs Minister just a few weeks ago about this and I have spoken to my own Department, because I am very concerned about it. There are some very serious social issues in these communities and there are distressingly, not as many opportunities where people who are under threat are able to talk about these things. And they find themselves in the most awful of circumstances and these decisions are taken and it breaks my heart, as a parent, and we just have to keep doing everything we can to try and keep these girls safe in these communities.

INTERVIEWER: There seems to be an annual debate about Australia Day and whenever that debate comes up I think about issues like those young girls and think well this is what we really should be talking about.

PRIME MINISTER: Look that’s true. That is true and we have to confront our inadequacies as a country but we don’t have to be overwhelmed by them, equally. I mean, we’re an amazing country, we have achieved so much and I think that’s what Australia Day is really about. Focusing on Australians from all walks of life, from all backgrounds, Indigenous and non-indigenous, recent migrants, long-term migrants, young, old, the works from all across the country. We are an incredible country but we’re not perfect. But one of the reasons we’re, I think, such a great country is we want to be honest about our failings and we want to fix them. And that’s what I’m about, that’s what Government should be about. But we should never be running down our country.

INTERVIEWER: Australia Day is Saturday, you’ve changed the rules so that local councils will be forced to hold citizenship ceremonies on Australia Day and you’re also bringing in a dress code for citizenship ceremonies. You’re banning thongs and board shorts. What’s happened to you?

PRIME MINISTER: Well not specifically those things, but what we’re saying is there needs to be appropriate standards of dress. I mean, I wouldn’t turn up to my kid’s graduation wearing thongs. If someone appeared in court in thongs you wouldn’t be too happy and why not? Because it’s not showing proper respect.

INTERVIEWER: But most people dress up for an event like this right, and if someone really wants to embrace Aussie culture by wearing traditional Aussie clobber, why stop them?

PRIME MINISTER: It’s not a traditional clobber, it should be a respectful ceremony. You should dress appropriately for occasions. By all means put the thongs on and the boardies when you’re having a barbeque or doing what you’re doing later, but you know, citizenship is the most important thing a country can give someone. And when you give something like that, you’ve got to treat it with respect. That’s all I’m asking for, Ben. I know some people, particularly others have mocked me for talking about this thinking I’m a wowser and all the rest of it, I just think citizenship is really important and I have been to so many of these ceremonies. I have signed… you know, it’s my signature on many of these citizenship forms from the time I was Immigration Minister and I know how important most migrants take it and I know most of them turn up when they get their citizenship form. They come, they dress impeccably, often they have a previous national dress on, the kids are there, and then you just get some who turn up and look like they just got out of bed. Now, I don’t think that shows appropriate respect to the others getting citizenship on that day and the great honour that has been bestowed on them for becoming an Australian citizen. I think, you know it’s an adult ceremony and the kids dress like adult too often because they know how serious it is and I think others who don’t feel like that need to know there’s a standard.

INTERVIEWER: You were photographed over the break wearing rainbow coloured board shorts. Have you thrown them out?

PRIME MINISTER: No, because I was at a community fundraiser at the pub. That’s where you wear them mate.

[Laughter]

That’s where you wear them.

INTERVIEWER: They were shocking, they were bad mate, they were bad.

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: Well they stood out in the crowd. I’ve had them for a very long time.

INTERVIEWER: Just ask your daughters, ask your daughters whether or not they should be consigned to the Vinnies Bin will you?

[Laughter]

PRIME MINISTER: I will, I’m sure they’ll have an opinion.

INTERVIEWER: We’ll talk to you regularly throughout 2019, thanks for joining us from Cairns.

PRIME MINISTER: Good on you Ben. And good luck to Ash Barty tomorrow, I was down there yesterday with Jen and the girls and we got to meet her. She did a great job and it was very exciting. And I think Nine is doing a great job on the coverage too, by the way.

INTERVIEWER: Well said, thank you so much for joining us, we’ll talk again soon.

PRIME MINISTER: Cheers mate.