INTERVIEWER: The Opposition Leader joins us now from Mackay in Queensland. Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us.
 
SHORTEN Good morning Lisa.
 
INTERVIEWER: We've got a lot to get through this morning so we will get cracking Mr Shorten. But just on that story we've heard out of China, how concerned are you about the detention of this Chinese Australian writer?
 
SHORTEN: You can't sugar-coat this. This is an Australian citizen who has been detained in China, the Embassy has just been notified. I'm very supportive of all efforts to reach out to him, to get to the bottom of what happened - what is happening. But it is very concerning, I can't pretend otherwise. 
 
INTERVIEWER: What does it say about diplomatic relations that it's taken five days for Australia to be involved, or to have any access in regards to this, when the arrangement is that it's supposed to take place after three days to have communications?
 
SHORTEN: Yes it is disappointing Lisa. It's not the way the arrangements are meant to work. Now I don't want to do any megaphone diplomacy, we've got an Australian citizen who has been detained in circumstances we're unaware of, and it's been a slow response from the Chinese Government to talk to the Australian Government. But it is serious, it matters at times like this - I don't think I need to do any domestic politics, we are disappointed, the Opposition is disappointed that this is unfolding the way it is. We are very supportive of the Department's efforts to reach out and to get to the bottom of this. This is not the way which relations between our two countries should be conducted at all.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten in Queensland I imagine you're getting a real sense of the concern people have about the economy and the loss of jobs. You're in the heart of the mining area. Will you guarantee that you won't do anything to hamper an Adani mine, if it does get over the hurdles that still confront it?
 
SHORTEN: There's a couple of big hypotheticals there aren't there, Lisa. But I'll go to the Adani matter, and then I'll go to jobs in Queensland. Adani has had a number of false starts. Labor's position is that there should be no Commonwealth taxpayer money used to subsidise this project at all. A position which I might note, has now been adopted by the Federal Government. It has to stack up commercially, it has to stack up scientifically and environmentally. In the meantime, what Labor is doing is making sure that we don't put all our eggs in the basket of one project, of one company. In the last few days, in my bus tour of Queensland, Central and Northern Queensland, we've announced significant investment in infrastructure, which will generate literally hundreds and hundreds - indeed, thousands of real jobs. $800 million for example, to complete the Rockhampton Ring Road; $280 million to complete the second and final stage of the Mackay Ring Road. I visited Maryborough, not in a Labor seat, in an LNP seat which is pretty strong. But for me that doesn't matter. We visited Maryborough, the EDi Downer rail workshops, and announced our commitment to make sure that we have Australian procurement. That if we're going to spend money on rail in Australia in the next 10 years - we're going to spend $100 billion at least, I want to see those train carriages built in Australia, in Maryborough, and other locations where we build rail transport in Australia. So we're focusing on a range of different industries and jobs and to conclude this point in Queensland, we've announced significant commitments to tourism and to new sources of energy. We announced a national hydrogen plan, because we think that hydrogen is one of the alternative fuels of the future. North Asia, Japan and South Korea are already making significant, eye-watering commitments to develop hydrogen, and I want Australia to be at the front of the hydrogen race, not at the back, as we sometimes are with other technologies.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, just in the last few moments, we have been hearing from your Deputy, Tanya Plibersek, who said about the Gilmore preselection that Warren Mundine has been very clear for the last 20 or 30 years that he wants a seat in Parliament, and he will take any party that will have him. For a long time - and I am quoting her, ‘he was desperate for the Labor Party to give him a seat in Parliament, there's a reason we didn't and the voters of Gilmore will discover that’. What is the reason?
 
SHORTEN: I haven't seen those remarks. But I think what you said in the preamble is correct. So I'm not going to spend my time talking about a Liberal candidate but it's correct to say that Mr Mundine wasn't successful in convincing the Labor Party to run.

INTERVIEWER: But he was the head of the Labor Party.
 
SHORTEN: Well we've had plenty of administrative heads of the Labor Party who haven't ended up in Parliament. The point about it, in answering your question is that he wasn't able to convince the Labor Party to back him, and it's a free country, if he wants to run for any party, I guess being in a party, that's up to him who he chooses, if he wants to change his views. He's running in Gilmore, but doesn't it highlight the confusion and the chaos.
 
INTERVIEWER: It seems to be fairly specific though Mr Shorten, that Tanya Plibersek says, there is a reason the Labor Party didn't, and leaving it up to the voters of Gilmore to discover what that reason might be?
 
SHORTEN: I think you just said earlier on that it was just, in very recent moments, that Tanya made that comment so, I haven't seen them. But it's a matter of record that Mr Mundine was unsuccessful in convincing the Labor Party, over many years. So he's going to try his hand in the alternative, the Liberal Party. The point about what's happened in Gilmore is they had Ann Sudmalis, then they picked another fellow, Grant Schultz. Now Mr Morrison has exercised his leadership prerogative to parachute in Mr Mundine into Gilmore. Isn't the point about this that we start 2019 the way we ended 2018? The Liberal Party are talking about themselves, they're not talking about jobs in Queensland or anywhere else. I mean, who the Liberals pick is up to them. Our candidate, Fiona Phillips, she stands on the side of no cuts to hospitals, no cuts to schools, lifting the wages. The big sentiment I get travelling around Australia Lisa, and I got it over the summer and perhaps even you've heard it in your travels, is that Australians are sick of the instability of the Government and they're also sick of the fact that everything is going up except wages.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well one of the sentiments we are hearing in letters to the editor and people concerned is about the franking credits and some of the decisions you've made on taxes. Reducing what pensioners might be able to access, these small amounts. Did you make the wrong call on the franking credit decision?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I don't want to get into a debate about the facts, but your last statement is 100 per cent wrong. We've made it clear that any pensioner who's in receipt of a part pension is not affected by our changes, so you can't say - I mean, you can, but it's just not right, when you say that pensioners are going to be affected, that's just not correct. The broader question of our reforms, going after multinationals, clamping down on tax loopholes which predominantly benefit just one small part of Australia, and the well-off. We can't in this country keep handing away bigger tax concessions and not better pensions. We can't keep giving away tax loopholes where we have a tax system, where depending on how clever your accountant is, paying tax becomes an option, whereas most Australians are paying increased cost of living. 
 
INTERVIEWER: But given the economy -
 
SHORTEN: So, we're committed to our reforms to make our budget sustainable.
 
INTERVIEWER: Given the economy has already started changing since you made these announcements, and certainly on negative gearing, how committed are you to these policies, and are you ready for an election that is basically going to be a tax referendum?
 
SHORTEN: Well you can say that the election is just on one issue, but I actually think the issue for this election is making the economy work in the interest of working and middle-class people, and our policies sit four square with that; better-paid jobs, better hospitals and schools. But in terms of our changes to negative gearing, one point which gets lost perhaps in the rush of the media – digital 12-hour news cycle is this: we are grandfathering our proposals. Most people don't know quite what grandfathering means. What it means is that if you currently negatively gear under existing tax rules, there is no change to your investment. So whatever change we introduce which is to wind back negative gearing for existing houses in the future, because we don't think it's fair that first home buyers have unfair competition with investors buying their fifth or sixth property, subsidised by the government. So we are saying to Australians, if you've currently invested in property on existing rules, you are not affected. That's a very important point for us to get out. 
 
So we are committed to creating fairness for first home buyers. In this discussion about the Government's trenchant defence of people buying their seventh or tenth property and getting a taxpayer subsidy to underwrite the cost of buying investment properties, I'm standing up for the first home buyers. I want the great Australian dream of owning your first home to be a reality, not a pipedream. This is a country where once upon a time, having rich parents was relevant to your financial health, now it's fundamental to your financial health. I want first home buyers to be able to enter the market. How is it fair that you could have a property investor bidding at an auction for their -
 
[FEED DROPS OUT]
 
That seems that we have lost the Opposition Leader there, unfortunately, we did get to hear quite a few of his thoughts though on some pretty critical issues that are bubbling around today. Mr Shorten we have you back, that's terrific - 
 
SHORTEN: Sorry about that Lisa.
 
INTERVIEWER: Can I ask you Mr Shorten, there's been a lot of talk about values and as we approach Australia Day, the Prime Minister certainly has been putting forward views. What are three values that you adhere to as a politician?
 
SHORTEN: Fairness. We think that Australia Day is about Australian values. I think fairness is a key value and as we approach this Australia Day, how is it fair that we have a tax system where how much money you have can determine your option to opt out of the tax system? How is it fair in this country that people's wages haven't risen, yet corporate profits have gone up by 13 per cent, wages have moved by barely 2 per cent. How is it fair that in some parts of Australia you can't access the same quality of health services that you can perhaps expect in the big cities? So fairness is a key Australian value. 
 
I think another value which I back in is opportunity. I think this has got to be a country which provides opportunity to all. I think, for example it is not providing opportunity when women don't get paid the same as men. Or where we don't have opportunity for people -  businesses in the regional Australia, to access the same NBN quality as we get in other parts of Australia. So fairness and opportunity represent some core values which I will champion. 
 
I think a final value which I would champion is actually keeping my promises. We're being up-front with the Australian people. We think that the politics in this country is in danger of being broken. A lot of Australians don't think their individual vote changes anything. They think that politicians are just in it for themselves. By putting out our policies in advance of the next election, we're not being a small target, and perhaps the Government delights in a proposition it can make up scare campaigns. But this country needs a better standard of political debate. We don't just want to win the election because we're not them, although that's not a bad reason to vote for us, because we're not divided, we're not unstable. We want to win the election because we put forward a vision for Australia. A vision in education to be the best in the world. A vision in health to be the best in the world. A vision to have renewable energy and new sources of energy to put downward pressure on prices. A vision I'll conclude Lisa, which says that this country works best when we work together, when all Australians get a fair go, when they can access opportunity, that's when I think we actually get the best out of this nation.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, we're going to have to leave it there. Thanks for your patience with us with the link. It's one of the benefits of being able to cross to regional Australia. Thank you very much.

INTERVIEWER: Every primary school student will have access to swimming lessons under a major policy announcement being made today by Labor. It follows a summer drowning toll which has shocked lifesavers around Australia, 65 deaths since the start of December. In the same period last summer, there'd been 44 drownings.
 
INTERVIEWER: And Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten joins us now from Queensland's Sunshine Coast. Good morning to you, Mr Shorten. We've seen so many drownings at beaches and also inland waterways, it's important to note. So does your announcement today cover every child everywhere in Australia?
 
SHORTEN Our aim is to make sure that every child in Australia gets the chance to learn swimming lessons. Now states are doing quite a bit already, but as you said in your preamble to this discussion, it has been a shocking toll this summer. I think one of the best things that as a nation we can give our children is confidence in the water, and that involves swimming lessons. So it is not the national government, if I get elected, taking over this - the state are doing it, but it is very patchwork. And isn't it great when kids learn to swim?
 
This summer I took my youngest - our nine year-old, we went down to the Bass Strait, which is about seven degrees colder water than where I am up on the Sunshine Coast. But she did nippers, and it teaches them confidence in the water. I could not have been prouder. And I must say, this summer in particular has opened my eyes up to the work that the volunteers and surf lifesaving clubs do, giving kids water confidence. But I think it is time for the national government to use a modest amount of taxpayer money to make sure that every child can finish primary school, having had the chance to do swimming lessons. It is going to save lives. 
 
Also, as you might appreciate - you might have friends who are adults who don't swim. Kids who don't get the chance to learn to swim when they're young, it sort of punishes adults for a whole long time, so I think it is a good social measure as well. 
 
INTERVIEWER: $46 million - let's hope it saves some lives, 65 deaths since the start of December, way too many. You're on a bus tour at moment, Mr Shorten, of south-east Queensland. The Prime Minister recently went on a bus tour. Are you going to finish your tour?
 
SHORTEN: Yes ours is a nine day tour, although because it overlapped with the weekend, I've had a day on the Sunshine Coast. I'm here at Moffat Beach - it's in the People's Republic of Caloundra. I know that Queenslanders are rightly proud of the Sunshine Coast, but having spent summer in Bass Strait where there are more wetsuits than bathers - listen, the temperature here is just stunning, and my wife comes from here so she's been at me for a long time - 
 
INTERVIEWER: It certainly is a lovely spot.
 
SHORTEN: So I've had a day off the bus and I'll go back on the bus on Monday.
 
INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister is also in Queensland at the moment. It seems like Queenslanders will be the big beneficiaries of election campaign cash-splash, and also be used for a lot of photo opportunities over the coming months it seems, Mr Shorten. Tell us, what electorates are you really targeting there, because you do have a good chance of winning some of these marginal seats that you're travelling through over the next 16 towns that you will be visiting.
 
SHORTEN: Well this is my sixth January as Opposition Leader and what I'm hearing all over Australia, not just Queensland, is people are sick of the instability. So when you say what am I targeting, I don't look at Queensland as LNP or Labor, I just look at them as Queenslanders. I want to make sure that kids get a good education and well-funded schools, that when you're sick you can afford to see the doctor, that the pensioners get a better deal, that there are jobs in regional Queensland. So our policies are aimed at all Australians, and I think people are just looking for stability. Do you know that over summer, one of the comments I got from people who say they are die-hard Liberals, they just want one person to be Prime Minister for the next three years. So stability is the big message I'm getting, and I can offer that after six years as Opposition Leader.
 
INTERVIEWER: Clive Palmer has been copping some criticism for sending out mass text messages. Will the ALP be doing that in the lead up to the next election?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I think that part of the reason why Clive Palmer is copping some criticism is that he used to run a nickel plant or business interest associated with it in Townsville. And that nickel plant went into insolvency and workers were left with unpaid wages and entitlements - the taxpayers had to step into the shoes of Palmer and pay the workers their entitlements. So I think what's annoying people, other than the electronic spam nature of these communications, is that it would appear a lot of people think that Mr Palmer owes his workers tens of millions of dollars, and the taxpayers - and they say, if you have got enough money to put your billboards up or annoy me with your unwarranted text messages, how about you just repay the taxpayer first? And I think once he does that people might take him more seriously.
 
INTERVIEWER: So that's a promise not to spam our phones during the election is it, Mr Shorten? No messages from Bill?
 
SHORTEN: We will only ever give you facts - important facts. 
 
INTERVIEWER: I think that might be the likelihood of receiving one. 
 
SHORTEN: But I tell you one thing Edwina, I'll tell you one thing we won't do: we won't be spending as a company director, money chasing votes when they need to go to repay the taxpayers and the workers what they are owed to begin with. It's about priorities.
 
INTERVIEWER: I say this with respect this morning, Mr Shorten, back on the bus. Thanks for making the announcement with us this morning about the school swimming program.
 
SHORTEN: Have a lovely morning guys. The swimming program is really important, it's good policy.
 
INTERVIEWER: It certainly is. 1,600ks to cover so he has got a long way to go. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, thanks for joining us. 
 
SHORTEN Good evening Leigh.
 
INTERVIEWER: Today the Prime Minister accused you of being a clear and present threat to Australia's safety. He was talking in the context of asylum seeker policy. I'd like viewers to understand where Labor differs from the Coalition, if it does at all in this area. So let me ask you a series of questions.Do you support the Government's policy of offshore processing of asylum seekers who attempt to come to Australia by boat?
 
SHORTEN: Yes. I mean, the Prime Minister, you said something that he said which deserves answering and this is the first occasion I've had to answer it since his remarkable press conference. I'm disappointed in what he said but I'm not going to get distracted by it, and that name calling is just not going to solve a single problem.
 
INTERVIEWER: As I said, I'd like viewers to try and understand the basic facts as well as the politics. So let me ask, do you support the Government's policy that people who end up on Nauru or Manus Island will never be allowed to resettle in Australia?
 
SHORTEN: We believe that anyone who comes here via people smuggler should be resettled in a third party nation, yes.
 
INTERVIEWER: Does Labor support boat turn backs and will that policy continue if you're in office?
 
SHORTEN: Yes, we will, we will support boat turn backs where it's safe to do so, which is existing policy.  
 
INTERVIEWER: Prime Minister Morrison's point is that Kerryn Phelps' Private Members Bill, if it's passed, will allow people smugglers to say to potential clients, "listen, Australia has changed the legislation, you won't have to stay on Nauru or Manus you just get some doctor to sign off in Australia and it's all good mate." This is where he has the point of difference with you. Is that a valid point that he's making?
 
SHORTEN: There's a point of difference but not the one he's claiming to make. I think after five years this Government should be ashamed of the fact that there are still people on Manus and Nauru and they haven't been resettled. Labor does not accept that the corollary between discouraging the people smuggling trade and keeping people in detention for five plus years. That's shameful. And the specific issue which Kerryn Phelps, crossbenchers, Labor and other parties were discussing, was where you've got two treating doctors say that a child needs a treatment in Australia, then that's got to be taken very seriously. 
 
And by the way, what Mr Morrison says is so bad about Labor, they quietly do anyway, but what we want to do is put some rules and certainty around it. It is not the case that to deter people smugglers and defeat their trade, we have to keep people in indefinite detention. That is not a healthy Australian way to do business here. 
 
INTERVIEWER: So you reject Mr Morrison's suggestion that if this Phelps Bill were to pass that it would give people smugglers an opening to restart the trade?
 
SHORTEN: The thing giving people smuggler's the best encouragement in 2018 is the constant billboard which the Government do when they say, oh if Labor gets elected, which is possible at the next election, they are egging the people smuggler's on to try their hand again. It is the Government who constantly say "oh well, if it's not us then the people smugglers will be back in business." These criminal syndicates are pretty sophisticated.
 
So it is the Government sending a signal to the people they say they're trying to stop, that if they're not in Government, the Liberals are encouraging them to try again.
 
INTERVIEWER: We know that this Bill has now been delayed until Parliament resumes next year, that's a few months away, a couple of months away, what happens to children who need medical evacuation during that period of time?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I just hope that the treating medical advice gets taken seriously. You know, there have been some children coming here anyway. I just think it's a shame that the Parliament of Australia, because the Government didn’t want to sit past five o'clock on a Thursday night, can't deal with this issue and other very important issues. The real problem today - and no wonder people hate politics, probably sick of the lot of us -  is that they found out today that the Government who is paid big dollars, say it's five o'clock we're going home now.
 
I mean, they've done that not because they care about what's happening on Nauru but because they didn't want to lose a vote in Parliament. This is all about protecting the pride of the Government and the Prime Minister, than worrying about the big issues which should be dealt with. 
 
Did you know Leigh, that on many occasions at the Christmas sitting of Parliament, we go past five o'clock in the House of Representatives if we have important business to finish. The Government didn't want to work past five o'clock because they were simply embarrassed that they wouldn't get their way on important issues.
 
INTERVIEWER: Let me ask you about another issue that came up today. 
 
SHORTEN: Sure.
 
INTERVIEWER: The Government's accusing Labor of being weak on national security again, because of some of your concerns about the encryption bill. This morning you did vote in of it despite saying you wanted more time to consider it, despite concerns about the way it was drafted and despite the Bill containing amendments that you hadn't seen. It's now stuck in the Senate until next year. Why did you end up voting for it even with all those
concerns?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all, the Government a few weeks ago said that they wanted to look at how we can break through the encrypted telecommunications of people who are criminals, terrorists and the like. We said that's fair enough. The Government presented draft legislation and there were hearings into it. A parliamentary committee which is majority government and minority Labor heard them. But what happened is that we had an agreed approach which would have seen the Bill dealt with this week.
 
Unfortunately the Government on Sunday or Monday said "no, we're going to have a fight with Labor." They're not worried about the outcome. Just the angle. And then what happened is that when we finally got back to an agreed approach, the Government presented 170 changes to very serious matters which go to digital privacy, security, safety. 
 
What we've managed to do in the course of today, in one day, is we got an agreed position last night, Liberal and Labor working together as we should, and today the Government gave us the 170 changes. They're now being debated in the Senate. The Prime Minister said this law was fundamental to keeping us safe over Christmas but because the Senate hadn't done it by three o'clock today, what's happened is the Government's gone home. That's not a way to run safety. Terrorists don't knock off at five o'clock on the first Thursday in December.
 
INTERVIEWER: Let's go to some of the other issues that were on the radar this week. The Government says it will return to a surplus from the 2019 Federal Budget.  At the last election you had a slower return to surplus timetable than the Government. If the Government does deliver a surplus in April, will the Budget remain in surplus if Labor forms government or do you anticipate you'll need to go back into deficit to fund all of your promises?
 
SHORTEN: I'm confident, based on the economic reforms that we've engaged in in Opposition, that we will a very positive position on surplus over the four years, and a much better position than the Liberals over the 10 years, because we're winding back unsustainable tax subsidies at the top end, which in fact the Government want to keep.
 
INTERVIEWER: Does a very positive position on surplus mean you anticipate staying in surplus?
 
SHORTEN: That's our aim and the point about it, but just to come to that, we do need to see what numbers the Government have got. I know people get sick of politics but this Government is going to bring down a Budget on April 2 and then rush off to an election. They're not really looking for scrutiny of their conduct.
 
INTERVIEWER: On climate change policy, will Labor put a price on carbon?
 
SHORTEN: We're not going back to the policies of the past. We're not going to have a carbon tax.
 
INTERVIEWER: No, but will you price carbon?
 
SHORTEN: No. What we're going to do is prioritise, and I'll give you the key features of what we're doing. We're not getting to, with respect, announce all our policies before the election tonight, but what I can say through you to your viewers, we want to see that by 2030 half of our energy sources come from renewable energy. 
 
We do want to reduce our carbon emissions in Australia by 45 per cent. We want to make sure that we are prioritising renewable technology, it's getting cheaper all the time. So we will absolutely going to have very positive climate policies which we'll unveil. I've already announced our energy policy six months out, which will see us investing in solar batteries for households where the income is under $180,000. Two million Australian households have got solar panels on their roofs. What we want to do is encourage the take-up of batteries so people can get lower prices and take control over their power bills and help in the fight against climate change.
 
INTERVIEWER: At the last election when Labor proposed to wind back negative gearing, the housing market was experiencing much stronger growth than it is now. Now in some places it is actually going backwards, houses are losing value. Will you rethink that negative gearing policy?
 
SHORTEN: We're going to stick to our existing policies. It's just not fair for our younger generation to not be able to afford their first home when the Government of the day is giving a tax subsidy to property investors to buy their fifth or sixth. We want to keep the dream of Australian home ownership alive.
 
INTERVIEWER: Sorry to interrupt, but, and what's going on in the property market at the moment doesn't give you pause on that?
 
SHORTEN: What's going on in the property market at the moment is the banks are restricting credit. It's unrelated to our policy. What we want to do is provide a level playing field for first-home buyers. I'm a parent of teenagers. They're still at home, I don't know where they're going, that's great, but one day they're going to want to buy their own home. 
 
I think I'm like a lot of parents and indeed grandparents who wonder how will their kids ever enter the housing market? So what we want to do is level the playing field. The issue around housing prices, that's driven by the fact the banks aren't lending as much money as they once were, not our policy. We're not even in government, and we have said to everyone who currently enjoys this tax subsidy, we're not changing the rules for you. You've invested under one set of rules. We won't change the goal posts but we want to make long-term reform to put fairness back into the housing market for first home buyers.
 
INTERVIEWER: How many times have you spoken to Malcolm Turnbull since he ceased being Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: I've spoken to him a few times. But I notice the conspiracy of the far right against Malcolm Turnbull. I mean, they kicked him out.
 
INTERVIEWER: But what do you talk to him about?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, the first conversation I had for him was to thank him for his service to the nation. I've spoken to former Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard, I've spoken to John Howard on occasion, I've spoken to Tony Abbott. I respect the office of Prime Minister. And I think the toxic partisanship, where we've got to take the view that because someone from another party said something, that you've got to hate them. I won't be that sort of Prime Minister. If I'm Prime Minister I want to reach out to all our former Prime Ministers and make sure we utilise some of their capacity. But let me be really clear, not that Malcolm needs me to speak for him, he's a Liberal, he's not voting for me, but he was Prime Minister for three years. He was a smart man. I didn't agree with a lot of what he was saying but I think the idea that I should never speak to a former Prime Minister because he's of a different political party, that thinking is just weird.
 
INTERVIEWER: Finally, 2019, there's an election year as we've alluded to several times, for all of the campaigns in memory, the leaders of the major parties have committed to two prime time interviews during the campaign on 7.30. Are you happy to agree to that again for 2019?
 
SHORTEN: Yes, let's do that, Leigh. That would be great.
 
INTERVIEWER: Look forward to seeing you next year. Bill Shorten, thank you. 
 
SHORTEN: Thank you.

INTERVIEWER: The Labor landslide on Saturday will have federal implications. A number of Victorian seats held by Morrison Government MPs are now at risk despite Scott Ryan's confidence. And Scott Ryan has made way for the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten in our Parliament House studio. Bill Shorten, welcome back to Breakfast.
 
SHORTEN Good morning, Fran. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, the Liberals have been belted in Victoria and today's Newspoll has Federal Labor 10 points ahead of the Coalition. This next federal election impossible to lose from here?
 
SHORTEN: I certainly don't think the outcome of the next election is at all decided. That will be decided by 15 or 16 million voters whenever the Government finally call an election.
 
In the meantime, full credit to Dan Andrews. Nothing should take away from him and his team in Victoria. I know there's plenty of discussion about lessons for the Liberal Party nationally which I'll come to in a moment in our chat I imagine, but full credit to Dan Andrews and his team. They've done a great job and they've been rewarded with a second term.
 
INTERVIEWER: There are a number of Liberal held federal seats that could now be in play. Is that your view of it? Corangamite, Chisholm, Deakin, Dunkley - those kind of seats - maybe even Flinders and Casey.
 
SHORTEN: Well there's no doubt that there's lessons federally and you've mentioned a whole range of seats where there was a significant swing to Labor. There was a strong swing to Labor even in my own seat. I think Footscray, there was a 15 per cent swing. It's a Victoria-wide thing. So I do think that Labor is competitive at the next election in a whole range of Victorian seats.
 
But for me, the lesson from Victoria is focus on better schools and better hospitals not cuts and chaos and division. What people want is positive plans for the future not negative infighting. What I heard on Saturday when I was handing out in a range of seats and I heard right throughout the state campaign, is people coming up to me, people say, I'm a swinging voter or I might have voted Liberal for Malcolm Turnbull, we're just sick of the division. You know for me, it just reinforces the wisdom of Labor in the last five plus years at the national level focusing on being united and consistent, focus on policies not personalities.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well those very promises that you just ran off there, that Daniel Andrews was promising, you know spending on schools and hospitals - we heard the Federal Treasurer on AM suggest that obviously the Federal Coalition is going to have to counter that kind of campaign, that kind of spending. They've now got plenty of money in the coffers we're reading. Are you concerned you might be outspent in this upcoming federal election and that will blunt any promises you have to make on schools and education - on schools and hospitals?

SHORTEN: Well I think the Government's got to work out which critique it's making of Labor: Do we spend too much or we won't spend enough? The reality is for me, it's not - I don't view education and health -
 
INTERVIEWER: Big spending, higher taxing, aren't you? That's according to the Government. 
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I don't know where the Government thinks they get the money they spend from. They don't just magic it up through their sheer genius. You know, they're saying they're getting higher tax revenues and that's how they're going to pay for their promises. 
 
But for me, I don't view education and health as a poll-sweetener, as some sort of political strategy. I want to see our kids get the best start in life. That's why we've already been leading the debate about properly funding our schools. We've been leading the debate, despite the Government's attack of us for doing that - you know that Liberal line 'more money doesn't help'? We've been proposing universal preschool for three and four year olds, we're going to uncap university places, we're going to make sure that we pay the upfront fees for 100,000 TAFE places. So for me, education isn't a political strategy, it's a nation building strategy. It's a it's a inter-generational strategy of handing on a better deal to the next generation. So yes sure, if the Government want to contest us on who's got the best health policies and education policies, and negative gearing policies, and clean energy policies and cheaper energy policies - I just want to have a debate about ideas. People want us - 
 
INTERVIEWER: Ok.
 
SHORTEN: That's where the political debate should be - the best ideas 
 
INTERVIEWER:  I want to come back to the Budget and how that might play out in a moment but in terms of ideas - there are already calls coming from within the Liberal Party for them to be less ideological on social issues and challenges such as climate change. We heard Scott Ryan say that they need to get their tone - change their tone so the Liberal electoral base doesn't feel excluded. Do you think Scott Morrison will heed these calls and that could lead, for instance the Government resurrecting the National Energy Guarantee or moving - changing energy policy. Is that what you see in the future there?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I've known Scott Ryan for some period of time. He is a very sort of sensible considered Liberal. And for him to say that you know, in a sort of gentle way, the Liberal Party has got to be less right wing - he's right. I think this nation needs less ideology and more outcomes. So in terms of working together, we've made it clear we've got an invitation to the Government that we'll work with them on the National Energy Guarantee. This week I'd like to see the Government support our and the crossbench push for a national anti-corruption commission. I heard Scott Morrison saying in an interview that there's got to more compromise. Well I'm from the tradition which is you do compromise. You know where you want to go as a nation. You want to see a fair go for all but you've got to work with all sides of politics. The problem is that the Government is that - the modern Liberal Party has lost the ability to say anything except no. And this is because of a real problem they have within their ranks that the right wing half of the Liberal Party say no on climate change, they're saying no on anti-corruption commissions, they're saying no on properly funding our schools, they're saying no on terms of reform of our taxation system. And because half of the Government says no, then the whole Government has to say no because they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and can't afford any more division.
 
I mean a lot of people still came up to me on Saturday and said, why isn't Malcolm Turnbull still the Prime Minister? And the Government's never answered that question satisfactorily, have they?
 
INTERVIEWER:  You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is Opposition Leader Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten, the Parliamentary calendar for next year should be released this week. It's expected to show that the Budget will be brought forward to late March or early April meaning the federal election would be in late May - we would think. What's your view on that?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think this is a Government to be honest, who have stopped governing. They view everything through the prism of beating Labor and winning the election. Now, that's part of what governments do - I'm not naive. But there are big issues which the nation needs dealt with now. We should resolve a national anti-corruption commission this week. We should get that process going. We should be in a position where we can resolve a National Energy Guarantee. All I did last week with Mark Butler and Chris Bowen, in large part is say to the Government we'll work with what you've already voted to endorse. But this Government - I don't know. Like, they're so sort of obsessed by climate change its vaguely weird that they can't actually accept the science. What will drive down lower power prices is policy certainty. Everyone knows that we've got to take action on climate change; business, unions, the scientists,  the community. Two million Australians - householders who've got solar on their roofs yet we can't get policy certainty which is absolutely crippling new investment in energy generation. Sure we want to do well at the next election - absolutely. But there are issues which we shouldn't have to wait for to resolve and we can do in the life of this Parliament; anti-corruption commission and energy being two of them which come to mind this week.
 
INTERVIEWER: As we just heard on AM, Josh Frydenberg is going after your policies. There is an election. We now know it will be in May almost certainly. They're particularly going after not just negative gearing changes, but today Labor's plan to scrap tax refunds on dividend imputations. They've published an analysis that finds almost half of those affected will be over 65 which he says would place a heavier load on the aged pension. And the Treasurer has got a new line against Labor: it says you want to impose a retiree tax. It's pretty tough line to counter, isn't it?
 
SHORTEN: It's not even true so it's not that tough to counter. If we stop -
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, they've got a whole lot of analysis that says 300,000 voters in Labor electorates will be hit.
 
SHORTEN: Well, let's go back to what you said. You were repeating Josh's line which says it's some sort of retiree impost. If you don't pay someone a payment, if you withdraw a government subsidy, that is not a new tax - it just means you're not handing out a subsidy. Dividend imputation was invented in 1987, whereby if people got dividends from companies rather than be taxed twice - in other words, the money's taxed within the company and then it is treated as income tax. What Keating said, is that you shouldn't pay two lots of tax - income tax and tax through the company on your shares. But what Mr Howard did in 2001, is he said even if you don't pay any income tax, we'll give you money back because you own the share. The idea that this nation can afford to hand out billions of dollars to people merely because they own shares is not a sustainable idea. And again, it's a bit like the way we want to reform other measures. We've got to get this country's books on a sustainable long-term footing. I'm concerned that we have 120,000 older Australians who are diagnosed as needing aged care packages and can't get them. We are going to have a royal commission into aged care because of the underfunding of aged care. Government is about making choices: I choose to invest in schools and hospitals, reducing the aged care waiting list, making sure people can get apprenticeships, making sure that we can reduce the out-of-pocket costs in Medicare. It's all about choices and you know, we're up for the legitimate debate. Now if Mr Frydenberg wants to call us names, that's up to him. It didn't help him in Victoria.
 
INTERVIEWER: You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is Opposition Leader Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten, the Government is clearly very vulnerable as it limps to Christmas. Kerryn Phelps gets sworn in as the Independent Member for Wentworth this morning. That makes it official - the Government's in minority. Is Labor going to try to exploit and test that over the next two weeks? I mean, there's now doubt over Peter Dutton's eligibility to sit in parliament - that's thrown doubt over 16,000 visa cancellations since the last election. Is Labor going to try and pursue this?
 
SHORTEN: We want to try and get things done in the Parliament - that's why we're going to keep pushing for a national anti-corruption commission. Labor supports having a national anti-corruption commission. We would like to see more done to reduce energy prices and we're willing to support a National Energy Guarantee. On Mr Dutton, I've just seen this morning before I came into this radio interview, breaking news that lawyers representing people who Mr. Dutton is trying to throw out of Australia, are using the cloud over Mr. Dutton's constitutional eligibility to be in Parliament to protect their clients. This just shows you that the circus has become a farce with serious concern.

INTERVIEWER: So what's Labor going to do about that? Are you going to try pursue that in Parliament?
 
SHORTEN: Do you know what? I think Mr Dutton should refer himself. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And if you doesn't, will you?
 
SHORTEN:  Well, you know and I know, Fran, that if we don't have the numbers, it can't be done. But what that means in the meantime is that we're jeopardising the authority's cases against 16,000 people - many of whom are alleged to be criminals from us being able to take action. I think it's, you know, this is a problem not of Labor's making. Mr Dutton needs to resolve the cloud. Now, he'll probably get up and yell and you know, carry on and attack Labor. It's the lawyers of the people that the authorities are trying to take action on who are using the cloud over Mr. Dutton's eligibility to save their clients -
 
INTERVIEWER: So, will you try and push this?
 
SHORTEN:  I think, Fran, is this the way we want immigration laws and strong borders being made by people whose constitutional eligibility has a cloud over it? 
 
INTERVIEWER: Ok, just finally -
 
SHORTEN: How does that help keep us safe and strong?

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, we've only got a minute to the news. Just finally, the latest Newspoll has Labor improving its lead, stretching its lead over the Government but not so on your standing. Scott Morrison is still outranking you in preferred Prime Minister. Why?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, you know that when the polls are good or bad, over five years, one month and 13 days, I haven't commented. I'm not going to start doing that now.
 
INTERVIEWER: But in all that time you haven't been preferred leader hardly at all, have you?
 
SHORTEN: Well no, Fran, what I'm not going to do is engage in that debate. But what I'll say to you, Fran, is if the Liberal Party thinks that on Monday, as we approach the last two weeks of Parliament, they're doing really well - well then, I've got a bridge over the mouth of Yarra I want to sell 'em. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, thank you very much for joining us.

INTERVIEWER: Our top story this morning the fall out of the Victorian election, joining us now is the most senior figure in the Labor Party from Victoria, Bill Shorten the Opposition Leader. Mr Shorten thanks so much for your time, what do you say to members of the Government who are questioning whether there are federal issues at play in the result at the weekend?
 
SHORTEN Well first of all I must say congratulations to Dan Andrews and his team, it's his win, it's Victorian Labor's win. I was handing out on Saturday, I live in Victoria, I campaigned in the state election, if the Federal Liberal Party believe that there's no message for the Liberal brand in Australia well that's up to them. How they sort of do the post mortem and the recriminations, I'm not going to get involved in, but what I saw on Saturday is what I've seen all around Australia, better schools and better hospitals trumps cuts and chaos and division. 
 
What I heard on Saturday as I was handing out in the suburbs of Melbourne, people saying they are sick of the division in the Liberal Party they just want some continuity, some stability – they also want long term vision. So the message I've taken from Victoria is a positive one, stick to the policies, stick to looking after the people, stay united and stable as we have for over five years and people will reward you.
                         
INTERVIEWER: Dan Andrews was claiming the mantle of the most progressive Government in Australia, is that something you would like to be able to claim if you win?
 
SHORTEN: We're certainly more progressive than the current government in Canberra. Listen, I'll let our actions speak for ourselves rather than me put tags on how we will be as a government, my aim is to get elected first but what I can promise Australians is for example, if you've got a three or four year old we'll make sure they get access to kindergarten for free. We'll make sure we reduce the waiting lists for aged care, I want first home buyers when they go to the auctions on a Saturday to be able to compete on a level playing field, we want to get the energy prices down and we want to get wages moving. 

So we're going to let our actions speak for themselves, that's what people want these days – less rhetoric and more just get on with the job. 
 
INTERVIEWER: The lead now you've got in the Newspoll is ten points, the result in the Wentworth by-election was diabolical for the Government, this result in Victoria it's yours to lose now isn't it, this election, a hundred per cent.
 
SHORTEN: Well Mr Morrison will have to call an election in the next five months, they have to. What we're going to do is take nothing for granted, the people haven't voted yet. I noticed the Government saying – assuming that we think we are going to win, I don't have that view. 

People come up to me in the street and they say take a long holiday, go on a cruise you know, it's in the bag - I don't have that view for two reasons. One, the people haven't decided and it would be arrogant to take that and two, I actually think what people want is policy strength, ideas - what are we going to do for the people. 

So we're going to keep sticking to our plan, roll out the ideas. We announced batteries for households, two million households have got solar panels we just want to get people to get control of power prices. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Daniel Andrews had a big spending agenda, do you recognise that there is a difference between state and federal sphere in that, do you have to have more fiscal responsibility in that sense and where is that in your list of priorities?
 
SHORTEN: Fiscal responsibility is important, I don't accept the Liberal argument that somehow Dan Andrews isn't fiscally responsible, they've made some very strong decisions. But we've been making hard economic reforms, my economic team of Chris Bowen and Jim Chalmers and the others, we've been making serious economic reform proposals to explain how we pay for our changes. We've lead the debate about reforming the taxation of multinationals who don't pay their fair share in Australia, we've made it clear that we want to wind back unsustainable tax concessions.
 
So every promise we make, we can pay for plus more because we understand that what matters in politics is to hand on a better deal to the next generation, that includes making sure we don't have national debt ballooning, it's doubled under the Liberals. 
 
INTERVIEWER: It looks like the Treasurer, Mr Frydenberg will go to a Budget in April, election in May, many of them see this as their last roll of the dice - to deliver a surplus and say look we're the economic guardians. How do you respond to that?
 
SHORTEN: Well, if they have a surplus we think this is a good thing but it's because there's increased taxation on companies. The Government can take some pleasure from the surplus but the reason why we will have a surplus is because Australian corporations are paying more company tax.
 
INTERVIEWER: What's the problem with that?
 
SHORTEN: Nothing at all, all I'm saying is that when we talk about fiscal management what happens in Australia is that it's not the politicians who drive for good fiscal outcomes in Australia it is the companies, it's the people who go to work. 

My concern is that in Australia at the moment whilst we've got good corporate profits and that's why we have the surplus, what we don't have is proper wages movement in this country. Corporate profits are increasing by ten per cent, wages by two per cent. Too many ordinary Australians are missing out on wage rises they're dipping into the family savings, they're living on the family credit card just to pay the ordinary outgoing expenses of weekly life in this country.
 
INTERVIEWER: Daniel Andrews' mantra was 'getting things done' and he's able to do that now because Labor controls both Houses in Victoria, you might not be so lucky. How do you propose to deal with the Senate if you are Prime Minister? Will you be pragmatic, will you negotiate with the right and the left, how will that work under your Prime Ministership?
 
SHORTEN: It will work cooperatively and constructively. I always had the view, back from my days representing workers in negotiations with employers, that no one has got a monopoly on having all the good ideas. The sort of leader I'd be if I was Prime Minister is I'll work with the crossbench and I'll work with the Liberal opposition if I was Prime Minister.

What this country needs is for us to work together more, that's why I'm proposing this week to work with Mr Morrison on a National Integrity Commission. Most people don't understand why the current Prime Minister has never publically gone on the record backing an anti-corruption commission at the national level, let's work together.
 
On the energy policy, we've offered to pick up the National Energy Guarantee which as you would know, was championed by Mr Turnbull, Mr Frydenberg and Mr Morrison.
 
INTERVIEWER: But why didn't you do that when Malcolm Turnbull was Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: Well he couldn't even bring it to the Parliament.

INTERVIEWER: But why didn't you agree to it? The National Energy Guarantee framework was all there. 

SHORTEN: Yeah you're right, we did want to see it but the problem is Mr Turnbull couldn't even bring it to the Parliament and we encouraged him to, we thought this was a good thing to do but this is the big problem in Australia and I didn't want to talk too much about my opponents. But the Liberal Party in Australia has lost the ability to say anything other than no. You know, they've got that right-wing half they're against climate change, energy, lower energy bills and tackling climate change, they say no then the Liberal Party has got to say no because they don't want to look more divided then they already are and nothing happens in Australia.
 
I think we saw on Saturday the frustration with do nothing negativity. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And do you feel emboldened by the result in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne? I guess everywhere in Victoria in relation to your position on climate change and your Emission Reduction Targets and so on, is that reflective of a broader view nationwide? 
 
SHORTEN: I think the nation is sick and tired after ten years of arguing about climate change that we just don't get on with it. Energy prices have just gone up and up and up, in Sydney, 26 per cent on average nationally, 19 per cent. You see a lot of businesses in Australia are struggling under the weight of massive gas price increases. 

So something's got to give and this constant opposition to taking real action on climate change, this sort of zealot almost anti-science attitude part of the Liberal Party has meant that there's been no policy certainty which means there can be no new investment in new energy generation and if there's not new energy generation, prices go up. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And just one related question on that, Adani, have you got a definitive position on that yet in terms of when you will back it or you won't?
 
SHORTEN: We've said that we don't want to see any Commonwealth tax-payer money directly or indirectly go into it, we've seen the missed deadlines, we're sceptics. We've said no taxpayer money should be used in this proposition.
 
INTERVIEWER: That's essentially fence sitting though, isn't it?
 
SHORTEN: Not at all, it depends if you want federal tax money or not. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Okay, Bill Shorten well it's good to see you in the mothership in Canberra- 
 
SHORTEN: Wow. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Will we see you again –
 
INTERVIEWER: You like it?
 
INTERVIEWER: - during the election campaign back on First Edition?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, sure. 
 
INTERVIEWER: You've enjoyed yourself then?
 
SHORTEN: I always enjoy talking to you guys. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Thanks.
 
INTERVIEWER: Cheers.

INTERVIEWER: The Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten, joins me now from Melbourne. Thank you very much for being with us.
 
SHORTEN No worries Leigh.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, you're unapologetically running for government on a big new agenda. So let's run through some of the detail of it beginning with climate change. Can we go back to first principles. Is it a fact that moving to a lower emissions economy will impose a short-term economic cost?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I was in Whyalla today, talking to the people who run OneSteel and they made it clear that they're investing in more renewable energy. So there is a cost to investing in new technology but they're absolutely convinced that the only way we will keep making steel in Australia is by investing in renewable energy. I had the same discussion up at Sun Metals in zinc in Townsville, or indeed let's just talk to the two million Australian householders who have invested in solar power. There is an initial cost and depending on the deals they can get, but most people who go to solar on households they don't go back, do they?
 
INTERVIEWER: So if there is a short-term economic cost, you have a 45 per cent target for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, what will be the estimated cost of that to the economy over the next decade, not in dollar terms, but as a percentage of economic growth?
 
SHORTEN: It won't have a negative effect on economic growth. In fact, most of the mainstream modelling shows that our economy will continue to grow.
 
INTERVIEWER: But if you have firms that have to be shifting and making the transition to having lower carbon emissions, that may mean that they have less money to spend on other forms of investment, it may mean they have lower profits so therefore they have less money to deliver in the form of company tax into government coffers. Those things could have a spin-off impact on to the GDP numbers?
 
SHORTEN: The problem with what you're saying is that you assume that there's no cost to doing nothing, and there is. That's why Australians wants real change at this election. They're sick of doing nothing.
 
INTERVIEWER: I don't assume that there's no cost to doing nothing. I accept your position there's a long-term benefit. What I'm asking you to do is to square with the voters about exactly what the short-term cost is of getting to that position?
 
SHORTEN: Well, my absolute conviction and belief, is that if we don't change, then the cost will be far greater than any initial investments.
 
INTERVIEWER: But what is the initial - 
 
SHORTEN: If you're asking me to specify what a particular company in a particular factory will have to do, I can't do that, nor could you, nor can the Government. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Isn't it a reasonable - 
 
SHORTEN: Let's be fair here, Leigh. Let’s be fair. I'm not going to get caught up in this Government came of gotcha when you have got to invent a number which you can't possibly. 
 
INTERVIEWER: But - 
 
SHORTEN: There's 250 companies caught by our safeguards mechanism, the same safeguard mechanism the current government applies to 120, each company will respond differently. You and I know that the reason why the government's trying to focus on how much it might cost to put in a new renewable energy system is that they're trying to distract from the fact they have no climate change policy.
 
INTERVIEWER: But if we could stick with Labor - 
 
SHORTEN: It's so dishonest this debate. It is so dishonest - 
 
INTERVIEWER: You can't just pluck a number out of nowhere. You've come up with the 45 per cent target.
 
SHORTEN: Sorry, I didn't pluck that out of nowhere. That was the Paris Agreement. That's what the scientists tell us.
 
INTERVIEWER: But if you are choosing that yes we will go with that number, with 45 per cent, you must have done...
 
SHORTEN: I'm not choosing it, the scientists say it. It's what we've got to do to stop the planet getting warmer.
 
INTERVIEWER: But as a government you are adopting it as your policy. You must have done some projections short-term to what that will mean to GDP. Will it take say 0.1 per cent off GDP, 0.5 per cent off GDP over 10 years?
 
SHORTEN: Let's go to Citibank, they're an internationally reputable bank. They say that the consequences in terms of cost, of policies on climate change like ours are immaterial. So I am saying to you very clearly that both in the short term and the long term, the cost of not acting on climate change is far worse than acting on climate change. And, again, let's, when you talk about cost, what's the cost to the environment? The cost is in not acting. When you talk about the cost to business, the reality is, that lots of businesses are so far ahead of government they're already investing. This is the problem with this short-term vacuous government who has no policies in the election other than to say they're not Labor. Australian people and business are so far ahead of the political debate, you must be bored by the Government's rhetoric which simply wants to you know say we can't do this and we can't do that. The rest of the world is so far ahead of us it's embarrassing.
 
INTERVIEWER: Let's turn to the Adani coal mine in Queensland. If there's a miner sitting in Rockhampton tonight watching and she wants to know, "Mr Shorten, do you reckon this mine will be a good thing for my industry and for Queensland?" What would you say to her?
 
SHORTEN: I'd say that my view on this mine is going to be based on the best science, whether or not it stacks up, and if it is, if it stacks up and passes all the scientific tests, I won't engage in sovereign risk. So in other words we won't arbitrarily upend things. But what I'll also say to that woman miner in central Queensland, is that if you're a labour hire miner, not a direct employee, I'll make sure you get paid the same as the direct employee. If you're a casual or on a fixed term contract I'll make sure you get a fairer go.
 
INTERVIEWER: If we can stick to Adani for now?
 
SHORTEN: Okay sure.
 
INTERVIEWER: We'll go to a range of other things shortly.
 
SHORTEN: By all means.
 
INTERVIEWER: In an interview with me on 7:30 in April last year you said, "I'm a sceptic of the project, I'm not a fan of the project. I'm happy to tell people my personal opinion." So your position has changed since then?
 
SHORTEN: I think you'd be fair enough to acknowledge that then, Adani didn't get the finance but now they appear to have got the finance. The other thing of course back then is they were talking about a 60 million tonne mine with 10,000 jobs. Now the promises have shrunk to a 10 million tonne mine.
 
INTERVIEWER: You're less sceptical of it now?
 
SHORTEN: In terms of the commercial high jump bar, yeah they've passed that.
 
INTERVIEWER: How about the environmental one?
 
SHORTEN: Well that's going to be a matter for the state and federal regulators isn't it.
 
INTERVIEWER: Various Labor candidates and MPs have had differing positions on Adani, it seems a little confusing what the party's actual position is. What do you say to the suggestion that you've created that situation by saying one thing to people in regional Queensland and one thing to environmentalists?
 
SHORTEN: I'd say that's wrong. Our position's very clear. Got to stack up commercially. Got to stack up scientifically. Got to stack up according to the law and we won't engage in sovereign risk. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Okay - 
 
SHORTEN: If we want to talk about conflicting positions, let's be even handed here, Leigh. You have got all these Scott Morrison Liberals down in Melbourne and Sydney, they call themselves "modern Liberals", and you've got the LNP in Queensland with a different view. You have the civil war between Matt Canavan and Josh Frydenberg about where poor old Melissa Price was going to finally...
 
INTERVIEWER: And I'll have the chance to ask the Prime Minister about some of that when he comes on the program. Let's move on to some other areas, you would have heard in our earlier story 83-year-old Chris Phillips, the retired carpenter who has $36,000 a year in income and he will lose $9,000 per year under your franking credits policy. Your policy is driving somebody like Chris heavily on to the public purse isn't it for everything from healthcare to social welfare?
 
SHORTEN: Well he already is and this is the real heart of the issue. When you get an income tax credit, when you haven't paid income tax, it's a gift from the Government. 
 
You're already on the public purse. But the criteria by which you get this money is that you just happen to own shares. Now Mr Morrison has been most dishonest in this. Where he says we're coming for people's savings. No, we're not. And then he's been most dishonest and saying somehow this is a tax. What currently happens - and I have people come up to me all over Australia who say, really, I mean seriously can you believe it Leigh, when you don't pay income tax you get a tax credit? 
 
See what the Liberals don't say to you is that when you get this dividend income, you own shares, you get the interest or the dividend from the shares, it's tax-free. But what this government does and previous governments have done it on both sides, is not only do you get the income tax free, you then get a 30 percent top-up from the government, it's a government payment. 
 
Now, it's not illegal and it's not immoral. But did you know Leigh that this generous gift going to some people purely on the basis they get dividends from shares and don't pay tax, it's costing $6 billion a year, nearly $8 billion a year in the very near future. It is eating the Budget and it's just a gift.
 
INTERVIEWER: Will your negative gearing policy make houses cheaper?
 
SHORTEN: It won't have an appreciable impact on the price of housing.
 
INTERVIEWER: So what's the point of having it then? Because I seem to recall when it was introduced, it was partly to make housing more affordable?
 
SHORTEN: Well what we want to do is create a level playing field, first of all. Why should a pair of first-home buyers, you know supported by their parents, they could be in their late 20s, early 30s. They go to bid for a house, get the deposit together, they've got to look at getting the stamp duty together, it's a lot more expensive than it was 20 years ago. And then what happens is they're bidding against someone in the crowd who is getting a taxpayer subsidy in the form of negative gearing. It's not fair and the other thing is this, this nation can't afford to keep giving away money to property investors to make losses on property. Now we are grandfathering it, though so no-one will be affected who is currently invested under these laws it's prospective. 
 
INTERVIEWER: You say it won't drive housing prices down by very much. Can Australia afford to adopt a policy that drives housing prices down at the moment at all given that the Reserve Bank said in its last minutes that rapidly falling housing prices are currently a downside risk in the economy?
 
SHORTEN: Well, that's all happened under the current government and that's at the heart of this election. This government loves to talk about a strong economy but strong for who? Corporate profits are up 39 per cent but wages are only up 5 per cent. First-home buyers find it hard to get in the market, but if you're a property investor buying your sixth or seventh property, this Government gives you a subsidy. Is that really fair? I mean the heart of the problem in Australia at the moment is that we don't have any economic confidence. Wages are stagnating, cost of living is going up. What we have is that capital in this country is taxed very lightly but income is taxed very heavily. It's not fair on our young people, it's not fair on our pensioners, it's not fair on people on fixed incomes.
 
INTERVIEWER: I'll come to some of those points in a second. I just want to ask about another of your controversial policies which is superannuation...
 
SHORTEN:  Sorry just to correct, when you say controversial, some in the property industry don't like negative gearing changes but a lot of people actually do like it.
 
INTERVIEWER: Superannuation I'm talking about. Paul Keating and others set up superannuation so it would entice people to save for their retirement so they would be less of a burden on Government across all demographics. Why are you making it less enticing for any Australian given that that's the whole point of it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I don't accept your assumption it's less enticing. It's preferentially taxed on the way in. So in other words, the income you pay into superannuation up to a certain level is still taxed below income you take in your daily pay packet. So it is preferentially taxed on the way in and preferentially or more favourably taxed while it's in the superannuation. So I don't accept the characterisation it's less interesting. What has happened though, is we've got to make sure that the function of superannuation is to make sure that people have money for their retirement. It's not about making multimillionaires, multi-multimillionaires is it?
 
INTERVIEWER: You spoke about the tax on income versus the tax on capital. Paul Keating made a point in a letter to the editor of the Financial Review last August that having 49 percent as the top marginal tax rate is way too high, especially when company tax is 30 percent. Where's Labor going to draw the line on relying on the rich to fund new spending? For example would more than 50 percent as the top marginal income tax rate be too much? Would 60 percent be where you'd draw the line? Where would you draw it?
 
SHORTEN: Leigh, you know there's no plans for 60 per cent or indeed 50 per cent, but I agree that what we need to do is eventually lighten the burden of income tax across all the levels. But to be fair, we already are offering 3.6 million Australians lower income tax at the bottom end. We've matched, we were ahead of the Government until the last budget and they basically matched our proposal for 10 million wage earners so when it comes to income tax, we are doing what we think is sensible. But the way which we also need to go in this country is not fund tax cuts on the never-never like this government is currently promising in five years’ time and the only way they can fund it is if they cut services. See this is one of the big numbers in this election. Don't worry about what a business has to do in terms of their decisions which they control. This is something Mr Morrison controls. 
 
Did you know Leigh, that he's handing $77 billion back over the next 10 years to the top tier of income earners? So a millionaire is getting $11,000 in Scott Morrison's land a year - yet someone on a much more modest income is only getting $11 a week tax cut - it's not fair. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Let’s talk about what you might control if you are the Prime Minister by the end of the month, you've said that you'll deliver a 20 percent wage increase to childcare workers, that it's the only sector for which you'll do that because it's unique. What's unique about childcare workers but not aged care workers or disability carers?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, when it comes to community sector, there was some wage improvement made for them when Labor was last in power. When it comes to aged care, let's see what the Royal Commission does. But there are unique features of the early childhood education industry. First of all, if you look at 96 different occupations in Australia, it ranks 92nd- that's 92nd bottom, not 92nd top. 
 
What we are relying on is these people are the first people that we trust our kids to outside the family home. We rely on them to teach our kids to learn. And also it's 96 per cent feminised. In other words -
 
INTERVIEWER: Everybody would agree with that but doesn't it set a precedent -
 
SHORTEN: That's right.
 
SALE: Doesn't it set a precedent for the Federal Government to pay wages for other private sector workers in the form of direct subsidies?
 
SHORTEN: No. Let's go to that. First of all, if we agree - and you were generous enough to observe that everyone knows that early childhood educators are both important and underpaid. There's four options we've got. One, we just ask them to keep working for bugger all. Well, I don't think that's an option. So two, we can ask the parents to pay more. I don't think that's an option because child care is already horrendously expensive. In fact, we're going to provide $2,000 per family, in some cases $1,500 per-family per-child and others. But the parents shouldn't be asked to necessarily pay the whole tariff, should they? We could ask the providers and it's a hybrid industry; there's not-for-profit and for-profit operators but they're operating on increasingly tight margins. Or, the alternative is the Government recognises this is an important sector, it recognises that we shouldn't be asking parents to pay more. So we should be able to find some scarce resources to help pay the adults who are educating our kids, who have been sorely neglected. Now, this is not our wages policy for everyone else. You said, why this sector and what will you do for everyone else? There are plenty of levers if you're a fair dinkum government where we can help have real change to help working people get back on top.
 
INTERVIEWER: When we take all of the policies that we've talked about tonight, is it fair for a viewer to conclude that a Shorten Labor Government will be at its core about the redistribution of wealth, that you want to take more from the wealthy and give more to people on lower incomes?
 
SHORTEN: No, that wouldn't be right. What we want to do is have real change, because, frankly, more of the same under this government isn't good enough for Australians -
 
INTERVIEWER: But as I said, when we go through your policies, a lot of where you're getting your revenue from is taxes on wealthy people, closing loopholes that mostly wealthy people can exploit and you're wanting to spend money on lower income people. How is that not a form of changing the economy towards a model of redistribution?
 
SHORTEN: Perhaps if you bear with me for a moment, I'll answer your question. 
 
First of all, we are advocating for real change. Everywhere I go in Australia, people are sick of a lack of vision. You know this election is about a choice. The Government are saying stay the course, stay with the current mob. We're staying no actually, this nation can do better. That's why we are closing loopholes, we're stopping spending money on franking credits - we're going to stop giving out tax cheques to people who haven't paid income tax and instead we're going to spend that money for example, on pensioner dental.
 
SALE: But if you - if you reject the assertion -
 
SHORTEN: No, no, hang on, Leigh. You keep characterising my policies -
 
INTERVIEWER: No, no, no, but what I want you to do is try to do it - 
 
SHORTEN: Well, I want to try and answer -
 
INTERVIEWER: Because if I'm wrong, if I am wrong and it's the core of your government is not about taxing wealthy people to redistribute income to lower incomes, in a sentence, what is going to be the core of the Shorten Labor Government?
 
SHORTEN: A fair go for all. We're going to invest in people and invest in infrastructure. You ask, you want - let's not dumb politics down to six second sound bites, that's what annoys people. I'll tell you what we will do - I'll give you as quick as possibly I can. We're going to have real change because more of the same isn't good enough. We're going to get wages moving again. We're going to take real action on climate change. We're going to look after three million pensioners and Commonwealth Senior Health Card holders with dental care, we're going to provide a million Australian families with better support child care then they are getting. And we're going to end the chaos. One topic we haven't talked about tonight is the lurch to the right by the current Government.
 
INTERVIEWER: That's a matter for me to Scott Morrison about. With all -
 
SHORTEN: Ok, but I'm happy to contribute, though.
 
INTERVIEWER: If you need to have a glass of water while I ask the question, please feel free.
 
SHORTEN: That's alright.
 
SALE: If - you listed out that list of things that you would like to deliver, the issue for you in an election campaign are that voters have to trust that you will actually deliver on that. Why should they trust Labor to deliver on that? You'd point, for example, just to your last thing there, to chaos. People remember the last couple of terms of Labor in office.
 
SHORTEN: Well, fair's fair. In the six years that the current government have been in, Labor has been united. I have got a tremendously talented Shadow Cabinet. People can also trust us because we're actually not hiding our policies. You said in your introduction that Labor -  I think Laura Tingle did, sorry. She said Labor is putting forward a big agenda. Well, we are. We believe that if we want the Australian people to trust us, we have to trust them and tell them what we're going to do. 
 
Now, I know not everyone is going to agree with everything. But for six years, we've learned our lesson. We're not chaotic and divided. The other thing of course is if you vote for me, you get a Labor Government. Whereas if you vote for Mr Morrison, who knows what deals he's done with Pauline Hanson and Clive Palmer and the other assorted extreme right-wing bar scene from Star Wars.
 
INTERVIEWER: If you're elected, you're unlikely to have a majority in the Senate. If you can't get through your revenue-raising reforms - super, franking credits, negative gearing and so forth - which of your promised spending will you be dropping?
 
SHORTEN: Leigh, let's see how we go in the election first. We haven't won and we haven't lost. But one thing's for sure. In the event we do win, we have put our policies to the people beforehand. What business tell me, what families tell me, what small business, what farmers tell me is that they're sick of surprises. What we are doing is we are putting our policies before the election to the people. So even though people use the word mandate quite casually in politics, I genuinely believe we will have a mandate and we'll do our best to convince the Senate. I mean, one thing I should say is that seeing the profusion of small and cranky parties in the Senate, I do think people should vote the same way in the Senate as they do in the House. What we don't want is instability. People are sick and tired of us politicians always being at each other's throats. What they want to see is us putting the people first. So what we're doing is putting people at the centre of all of our decisions.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, we've covered a lot of ground tonight. I'm sure our viewers appreciate your time very much. Thank you.
 
SHORTEN: Thanks for the conversation, Leigh. It was great.

INTERVIEWER: Well welcome Bill Shorten.
 
SHORTEN Great to be on your show.
 
INTERVIEWER: Now, you’re pledging to spend a lot of money through this campaign. This morning, $4 billion. This time on childcare over four years. Can you tell us who benefits?
 
SHORTEN: About a million Australian families will benefit from our initiative on child care. Everywhere I’ve travelled in Australia as Opposition Leader, one of the single biggest problems that people tell me is that everything is going up except their wages and child care is in one of the biggest things which is going up in price. It has gone up 24 per cent in the last six years. So what’s happening is mum and dad go to work and most of mum's wages are just going to pay the child care. So what we’re doing is we have made economic reform decisions to make sure that we spend more money helping people with the cost of child care and our proposals today, specifically for nearly a million families, mean somewhere between $1,500 and $2,100 back to families which they are currently spending on child care.
 
INTERVIEWER: Why won't child care providers just whack up their fees?
 
SHORTEN: Well good point. We are keeping an eye on this. We’ve asked the ACCC - as we give the subsidy to the parents we don't want the operators saying hmmm, yummy, we like that $2,000 subsidy we’ll increase the cost of fees. So first of all the ACCC is going to have the powers to monitor it. But if that doesn’t work I'm putting on the table today on your show we will look at introducing price controls like we do for private health insurers. I think that we want the money to go to parents, not to see more profit being gouged by particular operators.
 
INTERVIEWER: More money going to wages for childcare workers. Isn't that a reason for whacking up their fees?
 
SHORTEN: Well come along to Box Hill today where we’re going to talk more about how we are going to look after early childhood educators. Early childhood educators, it is a 96 per cent female dominated industry. I think that it is paid less than other male dominated industries because there are so many women working in it. You know it is a most important job. These are the first adults who we trust our kids to out of the family unit, so I think we should pay early childhood educators more. You will hear more about that later.
 
INTERVIEWER: If you put in price controls how can their wages go up?
 
SHORTEN: Well what we can do is we can make sure that if we are going to provide some support for the wages of early childhood educators, again we will say to the operators if Labor is providing some modest improvement in the wages of childhood educators, if Labor is providing a couple of thousand dollars a year for parents, what we say to the childcare operators is you don't get to pocket that. We want childcare to be sustainable, we want cost of living to be tackled and we want to see that the people working in the industry get a fair deal.
 
INTERVIEWER: Isn’t the problem though that you’re trying to give something to everyone, and everyone can’t benefit. In the end someone has to pay for this and in this case it will be those childcare providers who will get less money?
 
SHORTEN: No, not at all. What’s happening now is that this government is raising record taxes and they spend it on property investors on their sixth house with negative gearing. This is a government who is not tough on multinationals paying their fair share. Instead of being slack on the multinationals, instead of giving away unsustainable tax giveaways to property investors to buy their sixth house, we want to use that money to help subsidise the child care industry so that parents on the front line get cost of living relief.
 
INTERVIEWER: Let's go to that. How much are you raising in taxes over the next decade. The Government says $387 billion. What's your figure?
 
SHORTEN: Well we’ll release our figures before the election is concluded, but we’ve also made clear that we think we need to wind back what we give to negative gearing.
 
INTERVIEWER: You should know some of this now though, what you are raising in negative gearing and capital gains tax, what you’re doing in franking credits, so could you give us a figure over if not the next 10 years, over the next four years as to what you expect to raise.
 
SHORTEN: We will do that closer to the election but suffice to say we have done our maths and we are able to pay for the promises we are making. Once we have revealed all of our promises, then we will reveal the costings to back it up.
 
INTERVIEWER: I understand that, but some of this stuff would be well known to you by now because these are policies you have been working on for six years so can you give us a figure on what you intend to raise by way of cutting tax concessions and raising taxes over the next 10 years?
 
SHORTEN: We will once we have announced all of our policies. That will be very soon. But the point about it is that there are tens of billions of dollars going in unsustainable tax concessions, tens of billions of dollars. We think it is a better investment, rather than giving a subsidy to someone to buy their sixth house to spend it on child care relief for a million Australian families.
 
INTERVIEWER: OK, if you won't or can't give us a figure on what you are raising in taxes, well can you tell people today whose taxes are going to rise in order to pay for these programs?
 
SHORTEN: That's a really good point. First of all, the government loves to say that if we are not going to give a tax subsidy to a property investor, somehow that’s a property tax. It’s not. What currently happens in negative gearing - and first of all, anyone who is currently invested under negative gearing rules won't be affected. So it is a future change. What happens is when the government gives a subsidy, a reward for investing in your sixth or seventh property, that's an expenditure. That means we are using tax income and we are giving it to a property investor for making a loss. Instead of giving that tax money to a property investor for making a loss, I would rather give it to parents. So it is not an increase in tax. What it actually is, is it’s a reallocation of priorities. I want to give it to …
 
INTERVIEWER: So you’re saying it’s a big transfer of wealth from people’s pockets into government’s pocket. Why would you spend it any better than they will? 
 
SHORTEN: Well it’s a matter of priorities. This is the truth in Australia at the moment. If you have a lot of capital you’re taxed very lightly. If you earn income you’re taxed much more heavily. What I want to do is to have a fairer, equitable system. Instead of just giving the property investors and the multinationals a lighter deal what we want to do is to use some of that money which we’re giving to them and reallocate it to spend it on child care. I would rather see a million Australian families, households whose incomes are less than $170,000 a year, get a couple of thousand dollars of tax relief than give that money either through slack tax laws to multinationals or through giving it to property investors. It is a matter of priorities.
 
INTERVIEWER: Isn’t it a matter of priorities that you also then let people know as soon as possible where this money is coming from, because you are actually arguing for very big change in Australia and people have the right to have enough time to know where that money is coming from and where it is going to.
 
SHORTEN: Well, the fact of the matter is we are arguing for a change in Australia. We don't want to - I mean, I think this Government is disgraceful in that they are offering a thread-bare policy agenda. All they are offering Australians is basically an unfunded tax cut in five years’ time, more of this trickle-down economics where the wealthy get wealthier and maybe a few crumbs come off the table for working families in this country. By contrast, we are saying let's change our tax system. Let’s stop giving money away to the top end of town. Let's start spending on the vast bulk of working, middle class.
 
INTERVIEWER: It's a big change and it's a big risk. Why should people trust you with that change?

SHORTEN: Because for the last three years, and indeed six years, we have been united. We are putting all our policies out there. You know you say you have got to give everything by the end of the election. We will. But the point about it is, we are putting out a lot of significant policies. We have been upfront with the people. We told people three years ago we intend to change the negative gearing rules, prospectively. We told people that we wanted to go after multinationals.

INTERVIEWER: Let's assume people weren't focused though, for example when you get asked through the course ...

SHORTEN: You can't have it all ways, you can't say when will you tell people ...

INTERVIEWER: But when you were asked during the course of the campaign are you lifting taxes on super you should say yes, shouldn't you? 

SHORTEN: Well I've explained that I didn't understand the question that was being asked.

INTERVIEWER: But you were asked about whether or not workers on over $180,000 are going to pay more tax, that's true too isn't it?

SHORTEN: Let's go through each of those points rather than rapid fire, let's have a conversation. First of all, we have outlined our policies for the last three years. Now you say people haven't been paying attention, fair enough, that's your view. But you can't say that we haven't been upfront. Then you have gone to a couple of specific examples. Now when we talk about tax relief, the fact of the matter is that for the next three years, Liberal and Labor are offering the same deal to Australian people but where the disagreement comes is this government is ...

INTERVIEWER: Sorry I will stop you there because you are not. If you are earning more than $180,000 a year, you are going to lift people's taxes, aren't you? 

SHORTEN: Yes, for the vast bulk of people we are offering the same thing. You are quite right, for the three per cent of tax earners we still think we need a budget repair levy until 22-23. So you are right there. But the point about it is if we are going to have a proper tax system in the country, we've got to start looking after income earners as opposed to taxing capital lightly and income more heavily. Or to put in plain English, how on earth are we a country who has the negative gearing rules or tax credit rules on shares which are unique in the world. I don't want to be the best in the world at tax loopholes, I want to be the best in the world at cost of living relief for childcare and for kinder and for aged care and for schools and hospitals.

INTERVIEWER: A couple of other questions, were you aware of anyone at all who is acting on Labor's behalf who was talking about preference deals with Clive Palmer? Were you aware of anyone in the Labor Party or in the union movement that was talking on your behalf?

SHORTEN: There couldn't have been anyone who was committing me to a preference deal. No, not aware of that. There is always conversations ...

INTERVIEWER: Not committing you to but starting conversations about the possibility of a preference deal.

SHORTEN: Hang on a second. As you would know as a seasoned journalist, there is always plenty of conversations. But you also understand, someone who has covered politics for a long time, that me and Labor, could not do a deal with a person who still owes the taxpayer nearly $70 million, owes workers an additional $7 million. That's a deal breaker for us.

INTERVIEWER: Did anyone...

SHORTEN: Only one leader in this country has done a deal with Clive Palmer.

INTERVIEWER: Absolutely. That's understood. But did anyone with your knowledge go and approach Clive Palmer? Did you know they were making those approaches?

SHORTEN: No. No. We are not doing that and let's be really clear here - there is no way that you can do a preference deal without me signing off on it. And somehow, though, what the Government is trying to do is look away from the deal they have done. There is one question which has not been satisfactorily answered. For Mr Morrison to give his preferences to Clive Palmer, for the Nationals, the Coalition partner, to give their preferences to One Nation, what have they promised Pauline Hanson and Clive Palmer? The reality is for Labor the price of doing a deal with Clive Palmer, too high. Not worth it.

INTERVIEWER: These are really good questions. Why don't you ask the Prime Minister himself on Nine News. We'll offer you a platform to do so, to go head to head with him. Why aren't you doing a prime time, head to head debate with the Prime Minister.

SHORTEN: Well first of all you know that we’ve offered Channel Nine the opportunity to do it through the Press Club. You have declined. 

INTERVIEWER: No, that's not - 

SHORTEN: You've declined. I am sorry if you are busy at lunchtime. The point about it is ...

INTERVIEWER: Why not prime time, that's when we have most eyes and ears.

SHORTEN: They have invented iView You know it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day - 

INTERVIEWER: At night time - 

SHORTEN: You know, it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day and replay it. I often see that. But the point about it is, ABC want a debate, Channel Nine want a debate, the Press Club want a debate. It's not really for me to sort out ...

INTERVIEWER: You've got a big program, why wouldn't you want to debate everyone and everywhere.

SHORTEN: Yeah, but do you know what? For the last six years we have been debating the Liberals. We are talking to the people. We've got three debates with the Government. I tell you what I do find extraordinary. I mean I can't sort out Nine and Two, I don't want to pick favourites. The point about it is we are going to Western Australia because they have never had a debate before. There is normally three debates in any federal election. That's the precedent. Let's go to the heart of the matter. If we want to talk about debate, where is their industrial relations minister to talk about wages policy? Where is their energy minister? Where is their environment minister talking about climate change? Where is their education minister? This is a Government where apart from Mr Morrison, they are silencing most of their colleagues.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for this debate.

SHORTEN: I enjoyed the debate.

INTERVIEWER: Right thanks mate.
 
SHORTEN: See you.

INTERVIEWER: Labor Leader Bill Shorten is this morning making his biggest funding announcement of the election campaign. It's $4 billion in additional funding for child care with 1 million families to get thousands in subsidies. 

INTERVIEWER: And Bill Shorten joins us live from Melbourne, good morning to you Mr Shorten. Let's get straight to the detail of this…

SHORTEN: Good morning Edwina.

INTERVIEWER: Who qualifies for the money? How much will they get and is it paid to parents or to child care centres? 

SHORTEN: The subsidy will be for parents. If your household income is up to $68,000 we will provide a 100 per cent subsidy up to the capped amount of $11.77 an hour, so 100 per cent. If your household income is between $68,000 and $100,000, the subsidy is going to rise to 85 per cent of what you pay. And then between $100,000 and $174,000 the subsidy will be somewhere between 85 per cent down to 60 per cent. What this practically means is that for the first time after six long years of Liberal government where child care prices have gone up 24 per cent, where we hear stories of mums basically having to contribute most of their wage to their child care, this is a game-changer to help cost of living for nearly a million families, and it’s just going to make one of the biggest pressures on the family budget will be less.  In a real term, in a dollar term per year Edwina, it’s somewhere between $1,500 and $2,000 every year which families will have which won't be going on child care costs. That’s a real help to the family budget.

INTERVIEWER: That is a huge help. Mr Shorten on that last point is it paid to parents or to child care centres? How does it work?

SHORTEN: Well we want the subsidy to go to the parents and what we're going to say to child care operators though is that we don't want them ramping up the prices. I think this is important point to make. We get that if you provide greater support for parents, there might be some child care operators who miraculously increase the fees by the subsidy which we are providing. So we're going to ask the ACCC to monitor prices. And what’s more is that if we see that there is some rent-taking, profit-taking by the operators, well then what we're going to do is we're going to contemplate price controls. So in other words, before operators can increase fees, they’ve got to get the approval of the government. So we want to make sure that the money gets to the pockets of the families.

INTERVIEWER:  Alright Mr Shorten it sounds terrific, $1200 a year saved by almost a million working families. On the surface as I said sounds terrific -

SHORTEN: Up to $2000, yeah.

INTERVIEWER:  But where will the money come from? How are you going to pay for it?

SHORTEN: We can afford to do this because we are making the tough economic decisions. We want multinationals to pay more tax. We are winding back the money that we give and negative gearing to property investors. It is a very straightforward proposition. It is about a choice. Do we want to be a country who gives taxpayer subsidy to someone to buy their sixth investment property, or do we want to help everyday Aussie families, a million of them, with the cost of child care. My view is that investing in child care is a better investment than giving a tax reward to someone who is buying their, you know multiple investment properties. So that is how we pay for it.

INTERVIEWER: Lots of families will be looking at that policy very closely this morning. I want you to have a look at this one, the Coalition is this morning announcing that it will cap Australia's refugee intake  at around 19,000 - that's half of Labor's planned increase. They say over-population, city congestion are the reasons. We’ve seen past elections turn on the issue of immigration. Do you think this could be a vote-winner for the Coalition.

SHORTEN: Well under Scott Morrison, immigration has gone up, not down. I mean, this is politics. It is not about migration. Did you know Edwina that in Australia this year alone under the Liberals, there are 1.6 million people from overseas with visas which allow them to work in Australia, 1.6 million. So, Mr Morrison if he was fair dinkum would be talking about that and how we train Australians to do the jobs, rather than rely on 1.6 million people from overseas who have got visas which give them work rights. This is about politics, it’s not about migration. Pure politics.

INTERVIEWER:  Alright Mr Shorten you both get the chance to be fair dinkum tomorrow across in Perth, the first leaders’ debate being broadcast on the Seven Network tomorrow and we’ll see you there.

SHORTEN: Look forward to it, cheerio.

INTERVIEWER:  Mr Shorten, yesterday, repeatedly, you refused to rule out reviewing the environmental approvals - the federal environmental approvals for Adani. Can you be fair dinkum with us and with voters and tell us do you rule out reviewing those approvals?
 
SHORTEN: I have no plans to review the approvals. But if we want to be fair dinkum, let's be fair dinkum and let's tell the voters the truth here, all of us. First of all if I'm Prime Minister I will adhere to the law of the land. I'm not going to be intimidated or bullied by environmental activists or big mining companies. For me it is all about the best science, the law of the land and not creating sovereign risk.
 
INTERVIEWER: So well on that, Mr. Shorten, in the past you have said you don't support Adani, you said you're sceptical of it, and the CFMEU has issued this pledge which several of your candidates, including Mr. Beers have either signed or said they're going to sign. It's calling on you not to do anything to stand in the way of this project. So will do you anything to stand in the way of the project?
 
SHORTEN: It doesn't matter if it's a union who comes to me or a business, an environmental activist. What I'll do if Prime Minister, is I'll work with all of those interests, but I'm not going to be the servant of any of those interests. We will adhere to the science, we will adhere to the law, we won't create sovereign risk.
 
But what we're also doing today, is we are refusing to let the debate about sustainable quality jobs in Australia be dumbed down to one project. For the record, Queensland currently exports 220 million tonnes of coal. For the record, under a state Labor government, in the last few years 30 resources projects have been approved. For the record, we're going to make Gladstone ground zero for hydrogen expansion and development in Australia. For the record, we're going to invest in a new network of pipelines to provide cheap energy for manufacturing around Australia. 
 
We're not going to put all our eggs in one basket. And what we're going to do, is make sure that the rules are followed. And talking of the rules, what on earth is Mr Morrison doing by not launching a judicial inquiry into the growing scandal around the allocation of $80 million to Eastern Australia Agricultural Services. He should stop running and hiding, stop backing up ministers where we have no line of sight in the decisions that have been made. Every day goes by, the suspicions grow, but I put Mr Morrison on notice. It won't be good enough if you just want to have some administrative tick box review. I believe that unless the department provides all of the paper work, not with a big black Texta marking out all the interesting details, but the fair dinkum paperwork, without the redactions, without the secret squirrel business which this government loves. It should be a judicial inquiry where you have got the power to compel witnesses and you have got the power to get to the bottom. Not some sort of administrative review, which you want to have when you actually don't want to have a review, but you you’re just seen to have a review.
 
INTERVIEWER: If you become the Prime Minister, will the CFMEU be allowed to enforce closed shops on construction sites, no ticket no work?
 
SHORTEN: No. And let's just be clear on that. No. We think that the problem in Australia is that everything is going up except your wages. And we want to see enterprise bargaining resuscitated.
 
We want to see a crackdown on dodgy labour hire. We welcome temporary skilled guest labour in this country but not when it becomes an excuse for not training Australians and for employing people in exploitative cheap labour arrangements which undermine the jobs security and lead to a very poor experience for guest workers.
 
INTERVIEWER: Could the resurrection of Clive Palmer cost you the election? 
 
SHORTEN: Listen I'm not going to get - sorry, there's only one person who has ever been resurrected and I'm not going to compare Clive Palmer to him. The point about it is, I'm not going to get distracted by Clive Palmer. If you want better health care in this country, vote Labor. If you want to get wages moving in this country again, vote Labor. If you want the pensioners to get a better deal, vote Labor. If you want to tackle the cost of living, vote Labor. If you want to make sure your three and four year olds get quality child care and it is not exorbitantly expensive, vote Labor. That's our game, the primary vote. 
 
INTERVIEWER: On George Christensen, what do you think he was doing in the Philippines for 294 days? 
 
SHORTEN: I think that is one of the questions of the ages. The member for Manila, but Jason's been our representative in northern Australia so I might get him to talk further.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well I'll tell you what he wasn't doing, he wasn't doing his job. This bloke has to be the laziest politician in Australia. Two hundred and ninety four days overseas on holidays in the last four years. That's two hundred and ninety four days where he's not doing his job. That's what I call lazy. And not just lazy, at the same time all of this was happening, he was putting ads in the local paper in Gladstone, after Cyclone Debbie, creating the false impression that he was actually there doing his job. So he's not just lazy, he was deceptive. I don't know about you, but if you take two hundred and ninety four days off on holidays, in the last four years, I don't think you deserve to keep your job. I bet the blokes behind us, if they took two hundred and ninety four days off in four years, their boss wouldn't keep them on, and then create the false impression they were actually at work, and lie to the boss, because that's what he's done, he's lied to the people of Dawson. What I think would be just is if the people of Dawson, in a couple of weeks’ time, send George Christensen on a permanent holiday, because that's what he deserves. 
 
INTERVIEWER: LNP candidate Gerard Rennick has been caught spreading conspiracy theories about climate change and some curious ideas about your preschool policy. What action, if any, should be taken against the candidate, and can you guarantee you would also apply that same standard to any of your candidates caught in a similar situation?
 
SHORTEN: To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate believes three year old child care is a political conspiracy. To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate is a supporting a 12 per cent corporate tax rate, which is a massive tax cut for the big end of town. And certainly no Labor candidate believes that the Bureau of Meteorology is engaged in some conspiracy to hide the facts on climate change. The LNP has got a factory at an undisclosed location where they can find candidates so out of touch with the real world it is remarkable. Now what sort of serious policies is Mr. Morrison offering Australia when they're running a candidate in a winnable position who believes that the Bureau of Meteorology's engaged in a conspiracy to not tell the truth on climate change? This is the problem with the LNP, they're divided, they're chaotic, they are held together by sticky tape and rubber bands. Mr Morrison should distance himself from the madness of some of the views we are seeing from some of the LNP but he can't, can he? Because he is a captive of the hard right of the Liberal Party and he's never satisfactorily explained why Malcolm Turnbull is still not Prime Minister of Australia.
 
INTERVIEWER: Can I ask Mr Beers a question about the Adani project. Mr Shorten saying that he has no plans to review approvals is hardly ruling a review out. What do you think of that and is this hurting the chances of you winning the seat?

INTERVIEWER: When we talk about projects like Adani, our position has always been clear. If it stacks up environmentally and financially, it should go ahead. In relation to coal mining more broadly though the real issues that are hurting Central Queensland, the real issues that are hurting Flynn, are the issues in the industrial relations landscape.
 
We talk about issues like casualisation, like the misuse of labour hire, like a broken industrial relations system that is skewed to the employer side so far that workers can't get a pay rise. Those are the issues that people in central Queensland are worried about and those are the issues that coal miners here in Flynn are worried about.
 
So when we talk about this issue, and I appreciate there is a fixation on it, Labor's position has been very clear for a long time. When I am talking to people in Flynn what they're worried about is a secure job, being able to put food on the table, being able to feed their family and make sure that when they wake up in the morning they still have a job to go to. Those are the issues I'm focussed on and those are the issues that matter to people here in the Flynn.

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, I have a question for you and also a question for Mr Beers as well.

SHORTEN: Oh, two questions, OK.
 
INTERVIEWER: Related. So you are confirming that you are not going to sign this CFMEU pledge to not stand in the way of Adani. I just want to get clarity on that. And Mr Beers, you did sign this pledge. Why did you do that, and should Bill Shorten sign it?

SHORTEN: First of all on the pledge, no I am not going to sign it. But you can deduce from that nothing other than I am not going to sign a pledge. We're very clear. For us, resources projects have to stack up scientifically and they have to stack up without requiring taxpayer money. That's how we think. That is our policy.
 
But I, for one, am happy if I've got local candidates who are backing the strong views of their community. To be fair to Zac at this stage in his career he is not running for Prime Minister, although he has got excellent talent as I think you are already seeing. I'm running for Prime Minister of Australia. The thing which is really annoying Australians is short term politics. You go this way and that way. Well that is not for me. What we will do is adhere to the law, no sovereign risk, back the science.

INTERVIEWER: In relation to the pledge, I'm not sure how many people have actually read the pledge. But it talks about the very issues I just spoke about. It talks about our commitment to support mining projects that stack up environmentally and financially.
 
It talks about our commitment to end the misuse of casual labour and the misuse of labour hire and make sure we restore fairness to the industrial relations landscape. So these are issues that are at the heart of our values here in central Queensland. So I have no issue signing the pledge. And Bill's position has been clear on this stuff all along, so he doesn't need to reiterate that.
 
From my perspective I signed that pledge because it reflects the views of the people that I represent. I will fight every day to make sure that workers in central Queensland start getting a fair go. When we stand up, taking on multinationals like Glencore. The LNP, let's be clear, when workers that were locked out at Oaky North went down to Canberra, the LNP laughed and mocked those workers, workers that were locked out of their workplace. I'll stand up for those sorts of workers every day of the week to make sure they start getting a fair go and the pledged I signed reflects that values.

INTERVIEWER: The ACTU wants to see the minimum wage rise by $50 a week. Is that the sort of increase you want to see?

SHORTEN: I will get Brendan to supplement the answer. We are not going to pick a final number but I will state this. The current adult wage for an adult is too low. It is too low. So we do want to see a rise. Under the Liberals we're experiencing massive wage stagnation. The last thing this government wants to do is talk about wages. But this election is a referendum on the cost of living and of course wage stagnation.
 
Of course the ACTU wants to see a movement in the minimum wage and an improvement in the wages situation. Let me remind you of some numbers which Australian households know very well. And I want to say to the Australian people today - I understand the costs of child care have increased massively. I understand the cost of going to see the doctor, the out of pockets, has increased. I understand that energy prices have gone up. I understand that wages are standing still or going backwards in the case of cuts to penalty rates and other sectors of the economy. I understand that people are dipping into their household savings to make ends meet. That's why Labor has a wages policy. It's a gaping hole in the government's re-election campaign that they do not have a wages policy. Mathias Cormann, the  
right-hand numbers man of Mr Morrison, the current Prime Minister, made it very clear that low wages are part of the economic architecture of this government. If you want to keep low wages in Australia and you want to keep wages stagnant and if you want to keep falling behind cost of living, then this government has got a plan for you but if you want to get ahead in life, this government hasn't got a plan. Over to Brendan.

INTERVIEWER: How do you expect small businesses to cope with the costs that you're loading them up with, with these increases?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we've always made clear that whatever outcome occurs should be after consultation and negotiation with business including small business.
 
You would think from the government's hysteria about giving workers a wage rise this is the first time in the history of the nation there has ever been a wage rise. The problem is that in the past there used to be regular wage rises. Now it's stalled. Small business survived in the past. Isn't it about time we called out the sort of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, Scott Morrison nonsense that if you give a worker a decent wage somehow it's the end of our economy as we know it? Rubbish.
 
When it comes to small business let me just say this. We're a much better deal for Australian small business. I noticed today the government's reheated last year's leftovers where they boldly told you all today a policy they announced last November and said, "Hey, presto, it's new." It's not. They actually said it last year. They're selling you last week's newspaper as this week's fish and chip wrappers. But what Labor is going to do is we've matched that policy last year, so that's great, no difference there.
 
But we are billions of dollars better for small business because we are introducing the Australian Investment Guarantee. It means that any business in Australia, big or small, if they want to invest in productive new capital and technology, they can claim an extra 20 per cent on the first day they purchase it. Port buys a new crane, that's an expensive undertaking. So they weigh up the cost-benefit. Under our proposals, 20 per cent extra you can deduct on tax. That's worth $3.8 billion over the next four years.
 
Now we think that’s worth helping business in, including small business, because what we get, what the taxpayer gets for giving that deduction to business is that they see a productive investment. When you add that on, the fact that we have matched the government on lowering the tax rate for small business, we've matched the government on the instant asset write-off, and when you look how in different sectors, from dairy farmers to mechanics, we've got specifically calibrated policies to help small business. What we say to small business is don't believe the government's scare campaign, look at the detail of our promises. The other thing I would say in favour of modest and meaningful wage rises is what that actually means is that the customers of small business have more money to spend in the small businesses.

INTERVIEWER:  Can I ask you a question about costs because costs have started to become a theme of the press conference. We don't have an answer to the cost for small businesses when it comes to lifting wages because we don't know how much you would like to lift wages. Small businesses and businesses at large don't have an answer as to how much they are going to be hit to meet your emissions reduction target. When will we start to learn a little bit more about your electric vehicle target and the cost to households and businesses there?

SHORTEN: OK let's go through each of those three points very briefly. There is a cost to Australian business when wage earners are experiencing wage stagnation. It means a decline in confidence. So there is an absolute negative cost. If working people in this country are not getting reasonable wage rises they stop spending money because they don't have it. That is the cost, confidence.
 
Now you went on to talk about climate, as I thought you might. So Mr Warwick McKibbin - I don't know if he is still in Africa on his safari, but he published an article in the Australian Financial Review today. And he makes it very clear that the debate about cost, a specific mythical number which I advised you of last week, he said it isn't the main game.
 
What he said to do is you have got to compare the cost of not taking action on climate change in 2030 with the cost of taking climate action. And what he said is have a look at the detailed policies. Labor's got policies. So let's once and for all, and McKibbin himself, has put a stake into that argument. It's the wrong question. Now we want to talk about electric - you asked three questions, I'll just go to your third one and then I will share the joy with everyone else.
 
On electric vehicles we are not mandating. If you don't want to buy an electric vehicle in 2030, don't. But what we are saying is we know that the rest of the world are building more car models with electric engines. We know that they are not putting the same investment into internal combustion. So let's just kill off this scare campaign once and for all. Labor doesn't mind what car you drive. But what I do mind is if we have got a government, a climate-denying, stuck in the past, technophobic government afraid of new technology denying Australians new car models and cheaper options in terms of petrol and maintenance which we see from this.
 
And while we are on the issue of scare campaigns I want to call out the latest bit of rubbish from the government lie machine. And that is the so-called death tax. There is actually only one leader who has never ruled out a death tax and that is the current Prime Minister. We know that this fellow, the current Prime Minister, he loves to get on the high moral ground, but then what he does is he behaves in the exact opposite manner, with no skerrick of truth. Labor has never had any plan for a death tax under my leadership nor does it have any plan for a death tax. But what this fellow wants to do is he knows it is a lie, he is intentionally telling a lie, but the old ad man doesn't care. So we will call out the ridiculous propaganda.
 
And the other thing is, the other scare campaign is the Greens. Look at the Greens running around saying they are going to tell Labor what to do. My party is 120 years old. We are the party who looks and focuses on working and middle class Australians. We are not going to take a lecture from the Green political party whoever since they have come on the scene has put the cause of environmental change back because they take it to the extreme margins. We are the only party focussed on getting a sustainable environment but making sure that working and middle class people don't get left behind.

INTERVIEWER: Just on the Greens, they want to end coal mining by 2030. Some in Queensland would say that is an extreme policy. Would you be willing to preference them below the Coalition?

SHORTEN: First of all it’s a silly policy and it’s a policy that isn't going to happen. In terms of the Greens, what I say to them next time they catch a tram - trams run on steel. Steel is made through a process of using metallurgical coal. I don't think they quite know sometimes where it all comes from. But that shouldn't be used as an argument, that should not be used as an argument not to take action on climate change. And I do think that we need to actually move towards more renewable energy in our system.
 
We've got to deal with the fact that we have got a government who are climate deniers. And you have got some of the extreme Greens who think that you can, you know, change the world on just the click of a finger. Thanks everyone. I should say I am going to address the workers now. The port has been very good to get them to stop to listen to us. I've no doubt they have found this terribly informative and you are all welcome to come to the meeting which we are having with the workers. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Any questions about this or other matters?

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, the member for Solomon said that there would be a support package for the NT. Will the Federal Government or a Federal Labor Government be bailing out the Northern Territory from their current financial crisis?

SHORTEN: Well whilst I'm not running for Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, especially as Michael Gunner is doing such a good job, gee the new Gunner Government was left with a lot of problems by the outgoing administration, the CLP-run people. You know, the CLP managed to do the double - the daily double. They managed to sell government assets, the assets of the people, the TIO, lease out the port for 99 years, so they got a whole lot of money in. So they sold assets that belonged to the people of the Territory and they still ran up massive debt and deficit. So the Gunner Government’s certainly got its work cut out for it. We will be announcing more details about further support for the Northern Territory. But if you want to talk about a Northern Territory package, Labor has already begun to outline our meaningful support in tourism, in roads, in health and education. Only Labor can be trusted nationally by the Territorians to make sure that you get a fair go.

INTERVIEWER: Will that include GST top-ups?

SHORTEN: Well, what we'll do in our way is we’ll put more investment in the Territory. I get there's a legitimate concern to make sure that no one gets disadvantaged in GST, and it was Labor nationally, working with the McGowan Government in Western Australia, who ensured the West got their fair share. So our door will be open to talk to Western Australia, not about changing the GST formula, but making sure the Northern Territory gets its fair share of investment.

INTERVIEWER: Will there be any cost to business under Labor's climate change plans?

SHORTEN: Our climate change plans will grow the economy, they'll create jobs and they'll lower power prices. I notice there's been a bit of a debate and a bit of a scare campaign by the News Limited papers talking about international offsets for carbon pollution reduction. And I thought this was something which both sides of politics had agreed on so I did a little bit of homework and I found this very interesting quote, which I think goes to the baseless, fraudulent scare campaign of the Morrison Government, backed up by their allies in some parts of the media. And it says, this quote says, "When it comes to helping the environment, it doesn't matter if you've reduced a tonne of CO2 here in Australia or in another country." I thought, well that makes sense. But I was surprised to find it was Josh Frydenberg who said that. So what we have is the government’s now scaring you about their own policies they used to have and support. When it comes to carbon pollution reduction, our strategy is the lowest cost abatement using a combination of international tools and domestic tools and might I also say plenty of incentives. Did you know that if we properly invest in renewables, there would be tens of thousands of new jobs? And did you know that if we don't take action, we're going to have a greater cost on our insurance on and arising from natural disasters. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten on the question of tax cuts, there's a report in newspapers this morning suggesting that Labor has taken a decision not to offer additional tax cuts for people on incomes between $90,000 and $120,000 or $125,000 a year. Can I – one – ask, can you confirm that Labor has taken that decision? And - two, if you can – what’s that say to people on those incomes? Doesn't it say, "You've got enough money and you're doing well"?

SHORTEN: Well, let's go through the whole position on tax and I'll be as brief as I can. But let's just state some facts. First of all, there's the first round of tax cuts proposed in the next term of government, whoever forms a government. Labor’s said that we have the same position. In fact we have a better position for 3.6 million people who earn less than $40,000. And in fact we've led the tax debate. In my Budget Reply speech of 2018, I proposed bigger, better, fairer tax cuts and the government then gradually, after a year of kicking and screaming, matched us. So on the first round of tax cuts, it's all the same except we're slightly better for people under $40,000. On the second and third round, they don't come in for a number of years and what we found when you study the fine print of the fraudulent claims of this government on tax is that they're promising people a tax rise on the never-never and they never explain upfront with how you pay for it. And let me, let me explain therefore how they pay for it - cuts, cuts, cuts. This government is addicted to cuts. We've had six years of cuts. You know, I never lose sight of the fact that current Prime Minister was the Treasurer for the last three years. He's the cutter-in-chief. Cutter-in-chief of schools, cutter-in-chief of hospitals, cutter-in-chief of services. How this government pays for these future tax cuts, which would require you to vote for the current government at least twice in two more elections, what it does is it requires billions of dollars of cuts. The Grattan Institute exposed this, called out the secret. The other thing is that let's look at the priorities of this government on their tax cuts. Did you know that there's $77 billion hidden away in the Budget to give tax cuts to the top three per cent of taxpayers? Or, put another way, in even more plain English, if you are a millionaire in Australia, you will get an $11,000 tax cut from the Morrison Government in 2024. If you are someone who earns $40,000 a year, you get $11 a week. For me, tax reform is about priorities. Yes, we would like to see more personal income tax reform, but what we won't do is sacrifice the schools, sacrifice the waiting lists, sacrifice the hospitals to make an unfunded promise, and this is the inherent lie of the government's position: they want to look after the top end of town by cutting services to everyone.

INTERVIEWER: The Australian is suggesting that your carbon credits policy would cost Australians $25 billion. I take it it's a figure you reject. How much would it cost? 

SHORTEN: Well first of all, it is just a nonsense claim. It is a nonsense claim and it is built upon the back of a big lie. It says somehow that using international offsets to help abate carbon is a bad thing. Well, if it's a bad thing, why don't go they to Josh Frydenberg, the current treasurer and say, you used to believe it didn't matter where you cut the carbon from so long as you were cutting the carbon. Well that's our view. In terms of the costs, we're relying on the same public modelling that the government has. But you know, these News Corp climate change deniers, and of course their ally, the Prime Minister - a coal-wielding, climate-denying cave-dweller on this issue - they all say, "Look at the cost," well they never mention the cost of the extreme weather events, do they? They never mention the cost of not getting into renewables and they never mention energy prices, do they? This is a government who every quarter used to rush out for the last few years and say energy prices are going down. Well that lie has been exposed. Energy prices are up 15 per cent because we don't have proper investment, because we don't have proper rules around energy. Hang on, I'll come to you. Just over here.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you. Isn't this issue starting to get a bit away from you? Is it a bit glib to blame News Limited? Shouldn't you announce the costings, bring that forward, bring voters in on your plans?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, the issue of climate change has been getting away from Australia for the last ten years. The people of Australia are fed up with politics. We want to talk about what has been getting away-- why is this nation paralysed on climate change? It's because one half of the Liberal Party, the bully boys, bully the other half. The reality is, if the Liberals could be trusted on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. What's been getting away from Australians is the fact that energy prices are going up. We are having a technophobic debate where we're told to be afraid of new renewables technology and keep doubling down and investing in power plants that are 50 and 60 years old. This climate change debate for a decade has been dysfunctional and dishonest and divisive. It's about time we backed the science and we backed the people.

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a rough figure at least on how much it would cost?

SHORTEN: Well, you keep going on cost. I want to say to you let's get this straight. What is the cost of taking no action? What is the cost of no action? I can tell you. Energy prices are up. When did this Government get a leave on its own appalling and abysmal track record on energy prices? Australians are angry. They're angry at a Government who can't work out taking real action on climate but want to push all the problems down the road and let our kids sort it out when they actually want action now, and Australians are angry at their power bills. Cost of living is the big issue. Cost of living and wages are the big issue in Australia. The middle class of Australia feel like forgotten Australia. They feel like that Bob Hawke had a view of Australia that looked after them, and they even thought John Howard had a view of Australia. The middle class are looking at this election, and they are saying to the government, "You're promising us nothing now, and you won't take action on climate change, you haven’t got a wages policy, all you want to do is cut, cut, cut." The big question, the big secret, is how does this government pay for its tax cuts on the never-never? Tax cuts which go disproportionately to the most well-off in our society? I will tell you how Mr Morrison pays for looking after the top end of town and the top three per cent of taxpayers - by making you, and every Australian, pay more for your health care and get less services in your hospitals and aged care.

INTERVIEWER: A report in the paper today states the McKibbin report estimates that it would cost businesses $25 billion by 2030 to buy the foreign carbon credits. Can you say how much money you believe Australian businesses will have to pay to buy these carbon credits over the next decade? Is this the $25 billion figure accurate? Is it more? Is it less?

SHORTEN: The $25 billion dollar figure is just a lie. It’s using - you can make any number work for you if you pump in the assumptions you want to. It is using top-price EU carbon offset prices and then saying that's the only thing that will happen. That is so intellectually dishonest it does not even deserve to be talked about. What we are going to do is start looking at how we help industry meet the future. You know, the big missing link in this whole debate - it's as if the government never tried to do did climate change. Now they have tried and failed. What we are doing is we are using their industrial safeguards mechanism. We are using their National Energy Guarantee. What we are doing is going to work with our energy intensive trade-exposed sectors: cement, steel, aluminium and other sectors. We have created a $300 million dollar fund to help them invest in new technology. The reality is that once companies - and I've visited the factories and organised the workforce, I've seen the technology, I've sat in the boardrooms - every company who invests in lower carbon pollution creates more productivity and more efficiency and they invest in new technology.

INTERVIEWER: $25 billion is a lie, Mr Shorten, you say, but isn't the problem here you don't have a number to put in its place? And as long as you don't have a number to put in its place, why should we be confident that you're taking the Australian economy somewhere where you know how it's going to be affected at the end of the line?

SHORTEN: Tim, you and I know this is a fundamentally dishonest debate. It’s not you or the people asking the questions - it is what the government's saying. It is so dishonest. You all recognise a scare campaign when you see one. I'll give you three numbers. 50,000 more jobs in renewables, if we go down our path. I'll give you another number - $18 billion dollars, the cost of natural disasters, but here I'll even give you a more modest number: When this government, when the current Prime Minister was the loyal Treasurer, of the previous Prime Minister - if you believe that I've got a bridge to sell you - but anyway, when the Prime Minister was the Treasurer, when the current Treasurer was the former Environment Minister and when Malcolm Turnbull was still on top, they said the National Energy Guarantee would deliver $550 in lower household prices on energy. The numbers we're using, are the numbers the experts are given, they're the publicly available numbers, and they're in some cases, Malcolm Turnbull's own numbers.

INTERVIEWER: On Indigenous Affairs, Bill Shorten, Labor has said it will abolish the Community Development Program, and is campaigning hard on that issue here in the Territory. What is your new plan, and if you can't tell us today, will that be outlined before the election?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I can, and I'm also fortunate to have people of the calibre of Senator Dodson here and I might give him a run on the ball, but I'll just make this. The current CDP's not working. And if you don't believe me, just talk to the thousands of people in remote communities who rely on CDP. We have got a view that it needs to be reformed and we will reform it, but I might invite Pat to talk about some of the defects in the current scheme, and our thinking about going forward. 

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, regarding, on the-

SHORTEN: Just hang on, hang on, gentlemen, ladies, we've a fair go at this press conference, perhaps I'll allow one more question and then we got to finish up, we've got to go to Tiwi.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, regarding your claim that with your climate policies, we'd have GDP growth of 23 per cent in the 2020s, is that business as usual, the same as if you didn't have the climate plan, and where did you get the numbers from, I understand it's from the McKibbin report, but isn't that a bit outdated?
SHORTEN: Sorry what was the last bit of your question?

INTERVIEWER: I understand that figure was from the McKibbin report, isn't that a bit outdated now? 

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, it's publicly available, now if we're saying, the campaign against climate change by this government is malicious and stupid. It's malicious because there are elements of this government, the right wing, who have undermined even people in the Liberal Party to take action on climate change, and whenever we talk about common sense on climate change, you just get a scare campaign run by the more extreme elements - just hang on- this is really important, cause climate change is an important issue in this election, and it's a malicious campaign by this government. What they want to do is scare Australians and say that it's too hard to take action on climate change, even though they ignore the fact that two million households have solar on their rooftops. It's also a stupid campaign.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, welcome to Perth.

SHORTEN:Great to be on the show.

INTERVIEWER: Firstly, tell us why you’re here today?

SHORTEN: We’re here to explain Labor’s great policies for this election. In particular, on this visit we’re talking about our exciting new ideas to improve health funding. At the top of the list is new money - $20 million – to help leukaemia patients when they’re in the battle for their life. Blood cancers, of which leukaemia is one, take a terrible toll amongst our fellow Australians. We want to encourage more cancer drug trials, so that people can have access to life-saving medicine.
INTERVIEWER: We have been asking our listeners this morning, Mr Shorten, to text through questions for you. I’d like to read you this text from Tim. He says “I’m really worried as a small businessman I’ve watched my business go from 15 staff to five since the McGowan government came to power and our local Albany economy has gone into freefall. Things are only going to get worse under a new government obsessed with all things green. When are you going to explain how your climate change policies will impact the economy?”

SHORTEN: Well you would love to know what business Tim is in, he obviously is having some business difficulties already, but let me just say this on climate change. First of all, taking action on climate change is good for the economy. Lack of action on climate change has led to an increase in energy prices. We know that investing in renewables is going to lead to 70,000 extra jobs. Western Australia is well placed to be a climate change leader, and that will lead to cheaper energy. Some other good news for a small businessperson, without knowing the exact small business he’s in, we are going to back lower taxes for small business, so that it will go from 30 per cent down to 25 per cent. We are also going to increase the ability of him to invest in new productive technology. If it’s over $20,000 any small business will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off their tax. So, if you’re in food, and you buy a new fridge, you will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off whatever the cost on top of what you already claimed and that will help you with cash flow, and that is great.

INTERVIEWER: People are looking at the hiccups and stumbles at a time like this when you are focusing on an upcoming election, and such was the case yesterday afternoon, where you were seen to not answer a question that was asked by a journalist, and we have another question from a listener from Owen, asking what are the costings for your renewables and greenhouse gas emission policies, you owe it to the people of Australia to be transparent on this.

SHORTEN: Well, you made a preamble to this question. I have answered questions on climate change many times, many times. But I understand that perhaps people don’t always look at your old interviews, and every interview is as if it is the first time you have ever spoken. But on the modelling, first of all, $18 billion is the cost of natural disasters around Australia, so there is a cost to not taking action. Power prices have gone up across Australia. That’s because we don’t have a national energy policy, while this government’s had thirteen different national energy policies. When there’s no certainty on energy policy, people don’t invest in new energy. In terms of our proposals, modelling by Warwick McKibbin has shown that our 45 per cent reduction, including international offsets, has the same economic impact as the Liberals’ 26 per cent, who are not having international offsets, so, there you go.

INTERVIEWER: So the costs are the same?

SHORTEN: Yeah. I would pick a more positive number than costs. GDP growth is going to be 23 per cent across the course of the 2020s. These are straight answers.

INTERVIEWER: I mean, the thing with these climate change policies, these policies take time. You know, natural disasters are not going to stop the moment a good policy is agreed to.

SHORTEN: I don’t think any of us that extreme weather events are getting less frequent, are they?

INTERVIEWER: No, but it may take a century to recover from that situation.

SHORTEN: If you don’t start – you are quite right, and what sort of world are we passing on to the next generation? We know this government is paralysed on climate change, and if they weren’t, Malcolm Turnbull would still be the Prime Minister, wouldn’t he?

INTERVIEWER: Vote Compass is the online tool that ABC is using during the election campaign to gauge Australians’ views on the policies, taking the personalities out of it. The number one issue here in Western Australia is not the environment, but the economy, and that is the concern, and that is where they don’t trust you.

SHORTEN: Well, I don’t accept that. First of all, the idea that the environment and the economy are two separate planets and separate solar systems is rubbish. I know that’s not what you’re saying, but some people think that they are two different worlds. The second thing is that good climate policy is good economic policy. The fact of the matter is, we should be an energy superpower, we have got more gas in the ground than just about anywhere else in the world. The fact of the matter is we are the sunniest and windiest continent, and yet we don’t benefit from that. The fact of the matter is, in Australia two million households now have solar on the roof top, and what we have got to do is get more battery systems in. You know, I think Australians are sick and tired of a debate that says the future is too hard. Look at all this carry on about electric vehicles. We’ve said that we would like to see a target of 50 per cent of new car sales in 12 years’ time should be electric vehicles. Now, that is not a big of a jump as it seems. We don’t make cars here anymore because this government did not do anything to save it. The reality is, the rest of the world is moving to produce more electric vehicles. Toyota is going to offer an electric model of all its vehicles from 2025 onwards. So it’s all about … the beauty of all of this is why shouldn’t Australian motorists have options? At the moment, all we get is the very expensive cars, but once we’ve got a government that is willing to put in charging stations so that people in the bush can use electric vehicles, why shouldn’t Australians get access to vehicles that are cheaper on petrol?

INTERVIEWER: But electric cars actually cost more, at the moment.

SHORTEN: Well, sorry, no, it’s actually been shown that over time when you pay for less petrol, it actually costs less. But I agree, at the moment the models are expensive, but this isn’t all about what happens next week and it’s not all about trying to take someone’s ute off them. We have got to have a political debate in this country which is not about scaring everyone, but says “this is what the future looks like”. What good is a government to Australians if it says that we are not going to plan for the future, we have no idea what’s coming down the road, we are not interested in international trends. This is the equivalent of a government arguing in favour of black and white television rather than colour, or AM over FM, although I like AM too.

INTERVIEWER: (laughs) Not seeing what’s coming down over the road is quite an amazing analogy because I don’t think even you could have realised that electric cars were going to be the hot spot that it is. But the hot button issue –

SHORTEN: I just didn’t realise that we had a technophobic government who is afraid of new technology.

INTERVIEWER: Every time we talk about it, we get loads of people talking about it, for and against.

SHORTEN: For and against. I guess my point is this: if you want to keep driving a petrol car, you can. Excellent. We’re not mandating anything.

INTERVIEWER: But you would rather they didn’t.

SHORTEN: No, I’m happy if you do. What car you choose to drive is your business. It’s not my business. My job as a potential Prime Minister of Australia is to make sure that you have got the choices and the options and that we are not ignoring what is happening in the rest of the world. What if you had a doctor that said there might be new medicines or new treatments overseas “Oh no no, that is not the way we have ever done it in Australia, we can’t access that.” We can’t be anti the future. What we have to do is make sure that the future doesn’t leave people behind.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten is our guest, I beg your pardon, on ABC Radio Perth and WA, the Leader of the Opposition. Let’s go back to questions from our listeners.

Barry would like to ask you, your campaign is based on fairness, what is fair about taking away franking credits from retirees who have worked all of their lives paying taxes? Another hot-button issue on this program.

SHORTEN: Well, let’s go back to this. When you give a tax credit to someone who is not paying income tax, that is a gift. Now, it’s not immoral – I don’t blame Barry for taking the gift – I don’t blame him at all, it’s not illegal. But how can you give a tax refund to someone who hasn't paid income tax? It is a gift and the problem is that this gift when John Howard introduced it in 2001 was costing half a billion dollars to the Budget. Now it is costing nearly $6 billion. When will we decide that this gift is too big? When will we decide that it's not correct that we should be giving a gift rather than funding our schools and aged care? It’s a matter of choices.

INTERVIEWER: A lot of people make the point that $3000 or $2500 is what pays for their health insurance every year, they make arrangements years in advance based on what you call a gift so why don't you grandfather these arrangements? 
 
SHORTEN: Because it is costing $6 billion. The reality is that when you go to hospital it costs a lot more than $2000, I need to find money for our ageing population. Did you know 411,000 Australians, nearly heading towards 420,000 in the next year or so, are going to be diagnosed as living with dementia? That is expensive. We have schools, we have childcare going up in cost, energy prices have gone up. Did you know everything in Australia is going up except wages? So I am not saying it is illegal or immoral. We are saying that anyone who is on a pension or a part pension is exempt from the change, but there is no principle of tax law since the ancient Romans, no textbook ever has said you should get a tax refund when you haven't paid tax. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten there are a number of tightly held seats in Western Australia that you're fighting over at the moment. There are some that you would give up on and one of them would be Curtin but you did play a surprise hand I guess when came to delivering a candidate to Curtin for the ALP, and with it looked like the aim of disruption I guess, Melissa Parke, I am talking about and she of course now has stood down as the candidate for the ALP for the seat of Curtin over, some people would say, embarrassing comments that she made claiming that a Palestinian woman was forced to drink bleach at the Israeli border. How do you feel about the remarks and your decision to endorse her in the first place? 
 
SHORTEN: Well I like Melissa. I think she is an accomplished woman and she was a good Member of Parliament when she was there and she's also worked overseas for the United Nations and refugees so, I like her. In terms of her candidacy, she thought it would be good to run and then she made a decision that she didn't want to become a distraction and of her own volition she decided to take a step back again 
 
INTERVIEWER: So you didn't ask her to stand down? 
 
SHORTEN: No. And the point about it is that she is a strong person. Anyone that knows Melissa knows she makes her own decisions. Having said that, in terms of what she has actually said I wasn't there. I am not saying she is wrong, I am not saying she is right. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Are you embarrassed by it? 
 
SHORTEN: No, she has strong views. I like Melissa. It didn't work out on this occasion. But I am not one of those people that is going to … I like my team and I think that politics is better suited when you say positive things rather than everyone piles in. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And now Josh Wilson supports a two-state solution in Israel and that is also causing you some tension? 
 
SHORTEN: No, he supports party policy and that is our party policy, a two-state solution - the right of Israel to exist behind secure borders but also recognising the legitimate aspirations of Palestinian people to their own country. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, will any elected WA Labor members make their way onto a Government front bench if you win?
 
SHORTEN: Who gets on the front bench is ultimately decided by the Caucus. But I think all things being equal that would be the case, yes. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Pat Dodson? 
 
SHORTEN: Well I have to let the Caucus members have a say, I don't run a top-down organisation, but I think personally Pat Dodson is an outstanding Australian, an outstanding West Australian. I personally approached him to run for the Senate and you know any room that he is in everyone else in the room always feel a bit better because he is such a significant father of reconciliation. 
 
INTERVIEWER: We have watched the Budget and your reply very, very closely. Why is the Newstart allowance, an increase, not an ALP commitment? 
 
SHORTEN: Well we are going to review it. First things first - I do think Newstart is too low. And the Government, they’re not going to do anything about it. What we want to do is review it, we want to see the interaction with the other benefits which people get, the tax and transfer system. But we are not reviewing it to lower it. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Would you look at changing it so that it, the annual indexation is similar to what happens with the pension?
 
SHORTEN: I will let the review look at all of those issues, that is a legitimate issue. I think that some conservatives say that you should only be temporarily unemployed therefore keep it low and that way it gives incentive for people to get off it, but I don't think keeping it so low actually achieves anything other than is unfair to people very down on their luck. 
 
INTERVIEWER: It makes a lot of people very sad... 
 
SHORTEN: We are up for reviewing it and we want to review it positively. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Substantially, I mean I know you can't commit but it needs a good hike... 
 
SHORTEN: We get into the adjectives game, what I can say is it is too low.
 
INTERVIEWER: Who do you imagine is on Newstart when you picture it in your mind's eye? 
 
SHORTEN: I think it is a range, I don't think it's one stereotype at all. You get people who are older who, the factory closes, they are thrown all of a sudden on the scrap heap and told they are not worth something. You could have young people. Youth unemployment is pretty significant in parts of Australia and of course unemployment in the west is a challenge. 
 
INTERVIEWER: We've been asking our listeners over the last couple of weeks about trust in regard to politicians and in particular who they trust more, you or Scott Morrison. 22 per cent of our listeners who took part in our survey said they didn't trust either of you. Do you accept that voters are switching off? 
 
SHORTEN: I think there is disillusionment with institutions generally. I don't think a lot of people trust the media. Now I do think they trust the ABC that is why, for example, we have committed to an independent public broadcaster. But I think institutions generally including politicians are viewed sceptically, that there is this view that we are all just in it to look after ourselves and not the people. I'd have to say to people who get frustrated, we've decided to go first, we've got to trust the Australian people. We have put our policies out there. Now the very fact that we are having such a conversation, we are looking to the future on climate change, or we are focused on better health care not bigger tax loopholes, the fact that we are looking at unsustainable tax concessions, and saying can this nation keep going down this road of intergenerational unfairness where you look after people at one end and everyone else is not looked after. So we are taking the first step to rebuild trust by putting our policies out there. In politics traditionally, the argument goes when you are the opposition be a small target, let the Government fall over. Now this Government is hopelessly divided. Anyone who thinks they're going to unite after the election has no idea of the deep level of hate within this Government and dysfunction and chaos. But having said that we have to rebuild trust and that is why we're putting our policies out there. That is why for instance I have been to Western Australia for 80 days as opposition leader. I do what I call Town Hall meetings. We invite a whole suburb. Doesn't matter your politics, doesn't matter if you want to protest, doesn't matter if you have a grievance at the system or individuals we invite you to come along. I know that anyone that has been to our Town Halls likes what they hear. What I have got to do perhaps is have this longer form discussion than little gotcha conversations at eight seconds at a press conference which doesn't really add much to the sum of human knowledge does it? 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten just a final question for you talking about town halls, we read today that you have agreed with the Prime Minister Scott Morrison to a debate here in Perth on the April 29. Can you tell us what the arrangement of that is. Will it be a town hall-style debate? Will it be a more formal debate? Will there be questions from the audience or limited journos? 
 
SHORTEN: My preference is questions from the audience, just direct. The media, of course, should be invited, they can film the interplay. My view is that the more that I can talk directly to the people the better our case goes. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Thank you very much for your time. 
 
SHORTEN: Lovely thank you very much for your interest.

INTERVIEWER: But now to other news, a bit closer to home and Bill Shorten is promising to fund $200 million worth of free blood tests for cancer patients and older Australians on day six of the federal election campaign. The Opposition Leader has already pledged to invest $2.3 billion to fight cancer. Yesterday announced a quarter of a billion dollars to free up waiting times in public hospitals. But questions have been raised over Shorten's costing as he denies it's been massively underfunded.

INTERVIEWER: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins us now from Melbourne. Good morning to you. Now you've promised to invest $2.3 billion to slash out-of-pocket costs for cancer patients. The Coalition says it's an irresponsible hoax that will actually cost billions more than you say it's going to. What do you say to that?

SHORTEN I'd say last week, the Government said there wasn't a problem with cancer funding, they said it's all free. This week, now they're saying we're not spending enough. 
 
The fact of the matter is that when you're in the fight of your life, you shouldn't have to be worried about the out-of-pockets. So we're going to increase bulk billing from about 40 per cent-plus to 80 per cent. I think that cancer makes you sick but it shouldn't make you poor. And we absolutely believe we're on the right track. 
 
I mean Medicare should be there for when you need it. And when it comes to cancer, one in two Australians will be diagnosed by cancer in their life. We just want to make sure that people don't have to be distracted by massive out-of-pocket bills which is the current problem.

INTERVIEWER: Look, this is the first time we've spoken to you since the election was called. The first Newspoll of the campaign has you well ahead of Scott Morrison: 52-48 two party preferred. Based on that, it would be a landslide to Labor. Is this your election to lose?

SHORTEN: Oh, I'm not getting ahead of myself. What we're going to do is not focus so much on the Government and the personalities but on our plan for the future. I think Australians are sick of an economy which isn't working for them. The fact of the matter is the cost of childcare has gone up under this government. The cost of seeing the doctor has gone up. The cost of energy bills have gone up. In fact, everything's gone up except people's wages and I think what Australians want is a plan for the future. That's why we're going to take real action on climate change and restore all the cuts to schools and hospitals. It's about putting people in the middle of decision making.

INTERVIEWER: Earlier today, we spoke to the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. What is your response to claims a Shorten Government would be the highest taxing government in Australian history?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, we don't accept that. This is the Government who's raised more taxes than anyone before us. And as our promises come out during the course of the election campaign, this government untruth will be exposed for what it is. 
 
But let's be clear here: it's all about choices in this election. This government wants to give tax cuts to the top end of town, this government wants to keep spending taxpayer money on subsidies to the lucky few. We want to make sure that we've got better hospitals and schools, that's what we want to do with our scarce government resources, look after working and middle class families.

INTERVIEWER: All right. While we've got you Bill Shorten, the children of notorious terrorist Khaled Sharrouf have pleaded to be allowed to come back home to Australia after years living in Islamic State territory. Their grandma told Four Corners program on the ABC last night they pose no threat to Australia. If you were Prime Minister, would you let them back in?

SHORTEN: Well I don't hold the children responsible for the mistakes of their parents. You know I don't know all the circumstances but I can understand why a grandmother wants to see her grandchildren safe at home. 
 
What I don't understand is what on earth possessed the parents, one, to pursue this hateful ideology of the terrorist ISIS organisation but dragging your kids into the middle of a war zone, no parent who loves their children would do that, would they?
 
INTERVIEWER: But you'd like them back in?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think you've got to work on that. We've got to make the kids safe. It's difficult. We'll work with the security agencies but I don't hold the kids responsible for the mistakes of their parents and I think that's just the humane thing to do, isn't it?
 
INTERVIEWER: Yep. All right Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us. 

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten is campaigning in Sydney this morning where he will reveal the latest details of the party's plans to cut cancer costs. He joins us from the Sydney Markets. Mr Shorten good morning to you.

SHORTEN: Good morning Michael.

INTERVIEWER: Firstly, to the news of the morning, what is your response to the arrest of Julian Assange overnight?

SHORTEN: It will be a matter for the legal system to proceed, he should receive the support any other Australian citizens should receive, the matter is going before court so I don't think there is much more I can add.

INTERVIEWER: What do you make of America confirming overnight that yes indeed it does want to extradite Julian Assange to the United States?

SHORTEN: I have only read what you read. Mr Assange is entitled to his day in court. I'm not going to pre-empt that.

INTERVIEWER: Should the Australian Government, any Australian Government, Coalition or Labor seek to stop such move?

SHORTEN: I think he should receive consular assistance beyond that, I don't know all the facts of the matter and he should deserve the ability to be able to represent it in court which he will be.

INTERVIEWER: You're campaigning in Western Sydney this morning, Bill Shorten, how worried are you about the prospects of the Labor Party not just in Western Sydney but in Sydney generally after the disastrous performance of state Labor in the recent NSW election?

SHORTEN: I think the state election had a range of state issues, there is always a lesson there and we're not complacent. What we are doing nationally is we're not relying on the fact we're the Government. They're divided, their third Prime Minister and 13th energy policy and a lot of the team are retiring and have given up. But we think it is a more important issue then just the Government. We want to outline a fair go plan for Australia, a positive vision for the nation. We want to re-win people's trust in the system and we are going to do that by focusing on families cost of living, the fact that everything in Australia is go up except your wages and we are going to really push hard on the fact that we want to have the world’s best health care Medicare system.

We have outlined an exciting vision to help people when they are in the fight of their lives by radically decreasing the out of pocket costs when you have got a diagnosis of cancer.  We want to re-invest in our three and four-year-old kindergarten, we want to make sure our schools are the best in the world, that they are properly funded.  Of course, 150,000 new apprenticeships and 250,000 university places.  The real issues affecting families, we want to pass on a better deal to the next generation than the one we inherited. That includes tackling lower energy prices, making them lower by reinvesting in renewables and taking real action on climate change.

INTERVIEWER: The Prime Minister on the show half an hour ago released the Treasury costings pointing to $387 billion burden as the Coalition puts it of the Labor tax plan over the next decade. Can voters afford to elect the Labor Party?

SHORTEN: Listen, the Liberals are lying about taxes. Let's just call it as it is. I don't want to spend this election talking about them but let's go to it. What we call unsustainable subsidies for the top end of town and rorts for the multinationals they call tax increases if they want to fix it up. They have a different view. I want to use our taxes to invest the best schools in the world and invest in looking after our older Australians and invest in the best health care system in the world. I want to keep alive the dream, it is our Medicare card not our credit card that determines our health care in the country. That is our priority. This government is lying about taxes. What they do is they are just saying unsustainable subsidies and rorts and looking after the top end of town. They think that when you tackle that, that is increasing taxes.

INTERVIEWER: It’s not the Government, it’s the Treasury figures. Are you saying the Treasury is lying? They are very similar to figures put out by Chris Bowen the Shadow Treasurer a few days ago.

SHORTEN: No. Let's go to one. One issue they say is terrible, the Government and Treasury and let's face it, these days quite often Treasury just says what the Government wants them to say but let's go further. One of the rorts we want to shut down, did you know that if you want to deduct millions off your tax, you get your accountant to do it. Did you know you can also claim as a tax deduction the hundreds of thousands dollars you give to your accountant to deduct millions out of the tax system, you can even claim what you pay the Government as a tax deduction. Most Australians won't access the system.

Why on earth is this Government defending the ability of the super wealthy to pay their accountants, to minimise their tax and then even claim the cost to pay their accountants. It is a sweet deal, but it has got to stop, this nation can’t just keep funnelling money out of the top end when we have got waiting lists in our hospitals, massive out of pockets for people who have been diagnosed with cancer. It’s about priorities, I'm for middle- and working-class people.  
 

INTERVIEWER: To another tax concession Labor is promising to wind back to some degree, negative gearing. The NAB has put out a report this week saying it expects house prices in Sydney to drop by 20 per cent before this fall is over from the peak in 2017. Does it give you any pause for thought regarding the winding back of negative gearing concessions?

SHORTEN: The fact that bank said this tells me a couple of things.  It tells me the biggest drop in housing prices has happened under the Coalition Government. I give points to the Coalition Government. They want to bag Labor for policies that are not even in when they are presiding over the drop-in prices right now. They were asleep at the wheel when the banks were carrying on like the rules didn't apply to them. Now they have got the regulators all over them, but the point is we have had a government that has presided over an unethical banking sector, remember they voted 26 times against the banking royal commission. When it comes to the housing market lets nail a couple of facts into the ground. 

If you currently invest in negative gearing, under the current rules, it doesn't change. The changes are not retrospective. I will tell you what will happen on Saturday right around Sydney and Melbourne and the cities, you will have young couples who worked hard to get the deposit together, they have got to pay other costs and charges and they will be out bid by property investors who are getting tax support from the young couple and other taxpayers of Australia.

I want us to be a country where you can buy your first home, you don't need taxpayer money to buy your 10th home. It is a matter of priorities. We could use some of that money we are paying to the property developers to make sure we can help defray the cost of child care and reduce the number of age care places. It is a choices-based election, this country can't keep giving money to a few people and disadvantaging young people coming through.

INTERVIEWER: Just about out of time so confirming there will be no change at all if you win government to the negative gearing plan? 

SHORTEN: There will be no change to existing investors.

INTERVIEWER: But no change to your future plan?

SHORTEN: No, that's right. Someone's got to have the courage to stand up for the next generation, that's what we will do.

INTERVIEWER: Just wanted to confirm that. The CFMEU is asking all Queenslanders to sign a pledge to support the coal industry. Should they sign that? 

SHORTEN: Listen, people ask politicians, they seek this campaigning. Our view on coal is clear. Let me restate it for the record: Coal and our gas are important industries going forward. They are important to our exports and that will be part of our energy mix, but I am going to take real action on climate change. This country has been broken politically for a decade because we haven't been able to move forward and take real action on climate change. The biggest reason why households this morning are paying higher energy bills is because there is no energy policy. Thirteen energy policies from the government we need real action to hand on a better deal to our kids and to reduce power prices for our family and our businesses.

INTERVIEWER: Should the Labor MP's sign the pledge? Based on what you said?

SHORTEN: It is up to them. 

INTERVIEWER: Is the CFMEU bullying your Labor colleagues in Queensland?

SHORTEN: If you want to talk about bullying, how about that LNP trying to threaten Melissa Price's job?

INTERVIEWER: I'm not talking about them, I am talking about the CFMEU. I am asking the question? Do you believe that union is bullying your QLD Labor colleagues?

SHORTEN: No, I’ll tell you what my Labor colleagues they are adults, they can sign or not. Doesn't change our policy and our policy is as simple as this, we get that fossil fuel and coal is important to export and power generation but I promise Australian who are fed up with the dysfunction and disunity of the Government on climate change we need to act. We need to embrace the future, renewable energy will help lower energy prices and that is the direction we are heading in. No pressure from the Government or conservative media is going to deter us. We're not going to sell-out our kids because we're afraid of the right wing of the Liberal Party.

INTERVIEWER: We will have to leave it there, Bill Shorten thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Look forward to talking.

INTERVIEWER: Hopefully many times over the course of the campaign.

SHORTEN: Hope so, see you.

INTERVIEWER: Now, the man who wants the top job, Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, is also in the Emerald City. He joins us now from the Sydney Markets at Homebush. Bill Shorten, good morning to you. You kicked off your pitch to voters yesterday in enemy territory, in the safe Liberal seat of Deakin. You must be very confident that you've got this election in the can?
 
SHORTEN No, Deb. It's great to be on your show this morning. As for where I campaign, I campaign over all of Australia because I think Australians are sick of politics as usual. I don't view Australia as Liberal or Labor, I just view it as Australia and we have all got the same challenges. Everything is going up except your wages. We have had six years of massive instability in the Government and people just want to see proper investment in their kids' education. Making sure that when you're sick it's your Medicare card, not your credit card that determines your level of health. They want action on climate change. So, we are about cost of living and that's why I started in a suburban backyard because that's where Australia is. It's the families around the dinner table wondering what the future is going to hold and how Labor can help them look after their family and their health.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, the bookies are the best bet of how things are going to play out and your odds of winning are better than you'll get with Winx at the track tomorrow.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah well, there is a way to go, things close up. But what I'm going to do is focus on the people. I happened to catch the tail end of the other fellow's interview and it's all pretty negative, and I suppose if you've run out of ideas that's where you go. We have got a positive plan for the future of Australia. I think Australia is over the fact that we can't take action on climate change and that our energy prices have gone up. They want to hear what we are going to do to help get wages moving. They want to know we can properly fund our hospitals and our schools. And today, I've been at the market here at Flemington. This is a fantastic market. It is the centre of the cut-flower industry in Australia, Mother's Day is coming up, lots of growers and I've also been over to the growers shed with the fruit and veggies - a lot of small businesses here and I think they were interested to hear our ideas to help small business as opposed to big business.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, you are promising to make life easier for Australians, but new treasury costings which the Government has released show you'll hit households with $387 billion in extra taxes over the next decade. Do you really think voters will welcome paying $5,400 a year more in taxes under Labor than the Coalition? It is a potent argument.
 
SHORTEN: The Liberals are lying about tax. I don't want to talk too much about it. That's just a bucket of lies. Whenever Labor closes a tax loophole the Liberals call it a tax increase. Whenever we stop unsustainable subsidies –
 
INTERVIEWER: Do you deny that these costings from Treasury are correct?
 
SHORTEN: They are not correct. There you go, short answer too.
 
INTERVIEWER: So no validity at all, you won't be taxing more -
 
SHORTEN: Oh no. Listen, you and I know that, and more importantly Australians know, this is a Government who is going to run on fear and negativity. For me it's a choice. Do we want to spend tax subsidies giving property investors their tenth investment property or pay accountants a million dollars to minimise your tax and then let the very rich claim their payment they made to the accountant as well as minimising their tax, or do we want to spend the money on making sure that when you are in the fight of your life with the big C, cancer, that we help you with your out of pocket costs? It's a question of priorities. This government want to give away our taxes to the top end of town. We want to see taxes spent on education and hospitals. At the end of the day, Deb, we can over-complicate politics. It doesn't matter if you are in the market here, or on the farms where the produce is being grown or in the middle of our big cities, the mums and dads wondering what to do with their kids on school holidays, it's the same thing. It's about family and it’s about health. If your family is ok, and your health is ok then everything else is a possibility. So we are prioritising cost of living, health and education, lower energy bills and we are going to go forward on that, not tax cuts for the very well off.
 
INTERVIEWER: A lot of retirees though, many of them who are on modest nest eggs are not millionaires, they’re worried about your changes to the franking credits. A lot of people who have got investment properties, a lot of them are not millionaires, are confused and concerned about your crack-down on negative gearing and capital gains tax. Will you be reviewing any of these policies, particularly the property ones in light of the fact we have seen the housing market really go downhill since you released that policy?
 
SHORTEN: Let's go to the heart of the matter, I'll try and answer it as quickly as the time will permit. But on property, let's not be confused. If you invest, if you negatively gear currently under the existing rules, for your investment that you've already made, it won't change. So actually no-one who is negatively gearing is affected. But going forward, we can't keep handing away billions of dollars to fortunate property investors, many of who are buying their fifth or tenth property when our schools and our hospitals are not properly funded, when we have got waiting lists for basic surgery, lifesaving surgery. So it's not retrospective the changes, and also going forward, you'll still be able to negatively gear for new housing. In terms of the rest of the propositions, I'll put it as simply as this: our tax system is making it harder for our young ones, our millennials, the younger people to be able to even buy their first home. We have got to start creating a level playing field. I want to keep alive the dream of owning your first home, not being able to property invest in your tenth home.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright, Bill Shorten, we thank you for your time this morning. There's five weeks of this. We look forward to chatting to you during the course of the campaign. Thanks again.
 
SHORTEN: Cheerio, bye-bye.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, welcome
 
SHORTEN Good morning, Barrie.
 
INTERVIEWER: That concern, that if you punish the banks in a certain way then credit might dry up, is that a reasonable thing to keep in mind when you decide on penalties?
 
SHORTEN: There they go again, the government. They already sound like they're backpedalling on making the banks accountable. Let's see what the report says. The reality is this a government that can always find an excuse not to do something to bring the banks in to heel. I mean is really what Mr Morrison is saying is that the only way that we can have a solid banking sector is an unethical banking sector? I don't buy that logic. But maybe that explains why the government voted 26 times against this banking royal commission, 26 times.  And basically the big economic plan the government has had for the last six years for Australia is to give the banks a 17 billion dollar tax cut.
 
INTERVIEWER: He wants an effective banking system, he doesn't want credit to dry up.
 
SHORTEN: Barrie, is this Liberal government, this protection racket for the banks scandals and rip-offs we’ve seen, are they really telling Australians that the only way that we can have a banking sector is to have an unethical banking sector? I don't buy that, nor do thousands of farmers and small businesses and people who have been ripped off by the banks. I for one have been shocked. I pushed for the banking royal commission against the government. They mocked me, they abused me but in the end we got our way. Now it sounds like the government is trying to say, "Well, maybe we need to have a bad banking sector to keep a banking sector." I don't buy that.
 
INTERVIEWER: So, do you commit to adopting all of the recommendations of the royal commission?
 
SHORTEN: We will in principle. I mean it would have to be a pretty amazing reason not to. I mean we saw that remarkable proof of life video where poor old Commissioner Hayne, who has done a great job, is sort of dragged out to try and give some faux credibility to a government who didn’t want to have a banking royal commission. I’m not going to let the government off the hook, they didn’t want this and now they are already trying to say ‘well maybe we need to have an unethical banking sector, we don’t want to go too hard against our friends in the banks.”
 
INTERVIEWER: You've come up with a recommendation of your own around the new protections for whistleblowers but it’s this financial incentive that’s thrown in as well. Why is that there?
 
SHORTEN: Well, we have a look around the world and the Americans have been able to make some big breakthroughs in some financial scandals by basically encouraging some of the people involved to be able to come forward and get a reward. What our plan means for people who are doing the wrong thing is that just be aware of the person next to you because they might just want the reward and not put up with corruption. I want whistleblowers to come forward. And also whistleblowers pay a big price. There’s a lovely fellow, Jeff Morris, he’s paid a big price for coming forward about the Commonwealth Bank and he has suffered great financial disadvantage. Are we a country who says we want people to sacrifice everything to expose illegality or corruption and then we punish them? Because what happens is when a whistleblower comes forward they get punished in many different ways after the event. We're trying to address the balance. I'm determined to make sure the big white-collar crooks, the top end of town, the next time someone cooks up a scheme to park a couple of hundred million dollars away from the eyes of the tax office, when mums and dads have to pay their taxes, we want to say to whistleblowers, ‘we’ve got your back.’
 
INTERVIEWER: But you talk about white collar criminals, and in this case that’s who you are targeting, and yet you oppose an ABCC in the area of industrial criminality.
 
SHORTEN: I think there is a bit of a difference there Baz. First of all, what we are saying is that in workplace relations, just one set of laws. Why do construction workers have to have a different set of laws to everyone else. It’s not fair. We oppose illegality wherever it is. But one of the weaknesses being that whistleblowers haven’t been rewarded.  What we're proposing today could apply in any workplace, any workplace.
 
INTERVIEWER: Couldn’t that be the risk though, the reward. It could be quite large, it could be as much as $200,000 in big cases - could that lead to vexatious claims?
 
SHORTEN: Well, if you think we're catching, if you think that we are hearing all of the insider deals that go on well I don’t share that view. Labor is going to pursue and make sure we restore faith in institutions, not just in the government. We've pushed the National Anticorruption Commission, we also want to make sure – and we pushed the banking royal commission. So we’ve been fair dinkum, our record is there. But we want to make sure that whistleblowers don't get punished. I don't believe in a system where we encourage whistleblowers but we then see them financially disadvantaged.
 
INTERVIEWER: I want to ask you about housing prices now, housing prices have gone up in Sydney and Melbourne by close to 10% in the last 12 months. There are predictions - have fallen by 10%. The predictions are they might fall by a similar amount or even more in the next 12 months. Is that a good thing or a bad thing?
 
SHORTEN: Well, prices go up and prices go down. It really depends if you're trying to buy or sell a house. I think the real issue the government has been getting at is they're trying to scare people about our sensible reforms to wind back taxpayer hand-outs to property investors.
 
INTERVIEWER: Because that might cause the house prices to fall even further?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all let's look at where the house prices have fallen. They've fallen under this government. This government wants people in Australia to forget that we have twin problems. One problem is that first home buyers don't get a fair deal. How is it fair that a couple in their 20s or 30s go along to bid for a house and they're competing against someone who is getting a taxpayer hand-out to buy the house as their sixth or seventh house? So that's just not fair. Everyone knows it's not fair. As usual with the Government if they're given a choice between standing up for ordinary Aussies or standing up for the vested interest, they picked the vested interest just like they’ve done with the banks. But the other issue is, if this government is saying and trying to scare people about our very modest proposals then what they are also doing is, they should take responsibility for the housing price falls on their watch. You never hear them do that do you. Somehow they want to scare you about stuff which even the treasury department says will only have a modest impact, but they want you to gloss over the fact that under this government our economy has underperformed, it hasn’t performed in the interests of working Australians.
 
INTERVIEWER: But will your changes to negative gearing mean that houses will be even cheaper?
 
SHORTEN: What our changes will mean is that it will be fairer, in terms of…
 
INTERVIEWER: But cheaper?
 
SHORTEN: I’ll come to cheaper in a second, first of all let’s deal with fair, this is the real reason we’re doing it. How is it fair, Barrie, that a couple have to compete to buy their first home with someone who is getting a taxpayer funded handout to buy their sixth or seventh home. In terms of the impact on prices, it will not have the negative impact that the people trying to promote and oppose our current scheme are saying. Absolutely not. Even Treasury, who as we know these days write reports for the government on their side, even they have said it will only have a modest impact.
 
INTERVIEWER: But by ‘modest impact’ it will cause a further decline in the price of houses.
 
SHORTEN: Oh no I don’t accept that, I accept that what we are doing is creating fairness.
 
INTERVIEWER: How can it not have that impact?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, the only way that you could follow the government’s logic is if you would stop investing in property in Australia. The reality is most people invest in property because it is a good deal. Some people do it to get a taxpayer handout. How is it fair, Barrie, that some people are able to access a taxpayer handout to buy their sixth or seventh house, and the rest of us or the rest of Australians can't.
 
INTERVIEWER: On the franking credit issue, you can see that it’s causing you more political harm because it's not grandfathered and you also can see that some of the people who will take the hit here are not wealthy.
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, just on this issue of grandfathering, you are quite right, when it comes to negative gearing all of the people currently negatively geared will not be affected and you’ll still be able to negatively gear your houses…
 
INTERVIEWER: But that doesn't apply to the franking credit.
 
SHORTEN: Well the franking credits, that's still prospective. Without everyone being bored to tears about the issue, in 1987, Paul Keating introduced the scheme, basic principle of tax equity, he said you shouldn't pay tax twice. So a dividend that a person receives is taxed in the company, company tax, and then it used to be taxed as income tax, income tax. He removed the double taxation. But in 2001, John Howard and  Peter Costello, when they had more money than they knew what to do with, abandoned tax principals. And now we have a crazy situation where a taxpayer gets a credit, sorry a non taxpayer, get a cash tax refund. What principle of taxation says that a person who doesn't pay tax can get a cash tax refund? Let's open the textbooks - it doesn't exist.
 
INTERVIEWER: But it does exist and a lot of people have relied on it for a long time and you are copping some backlash over this - the government is making quite something of it - are you prepared to have another look at it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all, the reason why we're doing it is there is no principle that says it is fair that a non-taxpayer gets a tax refund, a cash tax refund. But it is also not fair that we're spending $100 million a week paying non-taxpayers cash tax refunds. It is not fair in this country that we're spending more money giving non tax payers a tax refund than we are on public schools. So we're not for turning. It really goes to a deeper point - this government has run out of governing. They don't even want to turn up to Parliament. They just want to scare people about our sensible reforms which are about making Australia fairer.
 
INTERVIEWER: When you say you're not for turning, there will be no tweaking of the policy at all?
 
SHORTEN: Well if I can put it really directly, do people want a government or do they want a piece of plasticine. Do people want a government with tax principles and fairness at their core or do they just want  a lump of political putty. We’ve had six years of the plasticine government and we are putting our views out because we want Australia to be fairer and we want it to operate in the interests of the millions of people who go to work every day, the pensioners. Did you know Barry, for example, that we're handing back bigger tax refunds to ten million Australians than the government’s currently offering...
 
INTERVIEWER: We're just go to a package and we will come back to you. We’ve got a bit of a problem in the studio.
 
*** BREAK *** 
 
INTERVIEWER: And just to explain what happened there, one of our cameramen had a bit of an episode. He seems fine but we've got an ambulance on the way. So Bill Shorten, if we could just round off the interview.  What I did want to ask you about throwing forward to the sitting fortnight you seem determined to put up the new measure to deal with unwell refugees on Nauru. Are you pursuing that and do you think you have the numbers?
 
SHORTEN: Well, we'll be pursuing it. It really depends on what sort of pressure the government has brought on the crossbenchers. I should say though that I am pleased the final children are off Nauru. And I do believe that if the crossbench, and the opposition, and some of the progressive Liberals hadn't pursued this, I do wonder if the children had been off. And I do also think it’s correct to say although he was my rival, former Prime Minister Turnbull, the American deal, which we backed in. So I am pleased with this development but we want to keep making sure that we treat people with a proper duty of care and with access to proper medical treatment.
 
INTERVIEWER: Because of that development though, do you think that will have an impact on the thinking of some of the crossbenchers, and I’m thinking Cathy McGowan in particular and she might now be satisfied with that and she won't then support the Labor initiative?
 
SHORTEN: Ms McGowan has always said she's concerned about all of the people in detention, not just the kids. But I’m not going to put any more pressure on her, I’ll leave that to the government. In terms of the sitting fortnight though, one thing which I’m determined to do is to hold the government to account to the fact that they have only scheduled 10 sitting days in eight months. As people come back from their Christmas holidays imagine if they go into their boss and say, "Listen, I've been thinking about it. I only want to come to work for 10 days in the next eight months." You’d get shown the door. And that’s really what I’m going to be saying to the government, turn up to work and schedule more sitting days. And if they don't do that I’ll say to the Australian people, "If you want a change in the government, then change the government."
 
INTERVIEWER: Thanks very much for coming in. I appreciate it.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you very much.

INTERVIEWER: Well, in Victoria they are calling it the Danslide, the weekend election result that saw the Liberal Party receive an absolute drubbing, rewarding Daniel Andrews another term as Premier. So, does that result signal what is to come in next year's federal election and what will our next guest do if he becomes Prime Minister. Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins me now. Good morning to you, Mr Shorten.
 
SHORTEN Good morning, Georgie. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Measuring up the drapes for the Lodge?
 
SHORTEN: No, not at all. There is still another perhaps up to five months before the election. We're just working hard on policies which help the lives of everyday Australians; schools and hospitals, making sure that we get our infrastructure and public transport running properly for people.
 
INTERVIEWER: You must be very heartened by what occurred in Victoria at the weekend, it was a Labor landslide in your home state?
 
SHORTEN: Yes, I was pleased. I was pleased for the work of Dan Andrews and his team, nothing should take way from their success. But everywhere I went during the state election and indeed on the Saturday, lots of people were coming up to me and saying, when is the federal election and why is the Federal Government so divided all the time? So there is no doubt in my mind that when you argue for better hospitals and schools and not for cuts and chaos and division, people respond pretty positively to that. So it was a very good weekend.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well the Prime Minister is holding crisis talks today with Victorian Federal MPs. Have you got any advice for him?
 
SHORTEN: Actually, first things first - I am not going to spend my time bagging the current Prime Minister. What I would say, is focus on properly funding the schools and the hospitals. Parents want their kids to be able to afford to buy their first home. They want to be able able to be sure they can get an apprenticeship for them. Older people are waiting unacceptable periods of time to get packages. Focus on the people - that's going to be my plan for the next election.
 
INTERVIEWER: What about today's Newspoll, the Coalition's primary vote down to a near-record low of 34 per cent. It really is unlosable for Labor, this next election?
 
SHORTEN: I don't have that view. I have made the practice over five years now of not commenting on the polls - good, bad or indifferent. When I was out doing the family shopping yesterday, what people are talking to me about is the cost of energy. They also want to see something done about climate change. It is the day-to-day issues. They want to see the politicians focusing on the people. That is why this week in Parliament, Georgie, I am going to try and persuade the Prime Minister to back in a National Integrity Commission, an anti-corruption commission at the Federal Commonwealth level of politics and government is one of the areas in Australia where there is no anti-corruption commission. We should have that. We should be willing to submit ourselves as members of parliament to the same scrutiny as other levels of public life.
 
INTERVIEWER: You say you don't take any notice of polls but you do have a problem with your popularity. That Newspoll suggests that while voters want Labor in government, they don't think you are the right leader. Scott Morrison has doubled his lead as preferred Prime Minister. They just don't seem to like you.
 
SHORTEN: Well I don't buy what you are selling there, but I will go to this point, I did say that I don't comment on polls - good or bad, but if Mr Morrison, if he thinks that he is doing really well at the moment go and ask his Victorian colleagues. Georgie, what matters is elections and I think on Saturday we saw a big tick for Dan Andrews but also Labor's brand - backing in the schools, backing in the hospitals, getting on with the job not the cuts, the chaos, the division, the scare tactics. 
 
INTERVIEWER: But does that not concern you, that you are continually dropping as preferred Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: No. I have got to say that what concerns me is the waiting list that someone - the waiting time that someone has to get an elective surgery. What makes me concerned is when we don't have proper funding in our schools. I am really frustrated that energy prices have gone up so much under the Liberal Government. Let's call it straight here Georgie - people don't want us in politics obsessing about ourselves. They want us obsessing about the people's interests. Cheaper energy, get the wages moving again in this country, making sure that 3 year olds can get access to kindergarten and as I said, older Australians who've got to wait inordinate periods of time just to get modest Centrelink payments which is theirs by right, they are the numbers which really get me going.
 
INTERVIEWER: You mentioned that national anti-corruption watchdog, saying you will work with the Coalition but not wait for them. Just explain if you could how exactly that watchdog would work under Labor?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, we think that the Commonwealth and the politicians should have an anti-corruption commission. We want it to be a body which is created by law, that it is independent of government. We want it to have the powers of a Royal Commission. We want it to be able to investigate any concerns that there might be corruption at the national level. When I propose a national anti-corruption commission, it is not because I am aware of any corrupt acts but rather, members of Parliament and the Commonwealth need to demonstrate to the Australian people that we are up for us being accountable, just like everyone else is. So we will work with the Government but we are not going to wait for them. The crossbenchers, Cathy McGowan and Rebekha Sharkie, and the new member for Wentworth, Kerryn Phelps - they are all up for doing the same thing. I don't understand why the Government is taking so long on something which is so obvious.
 
INTERVIEWER: As you know, the Prime Minister has proposed tough new laws on terror, making it easy to strip Aussie citizenship from those convicted of terrorism offences. Do you back that proposal from the Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: We will have a good look at them. We have backed 15 sets of changes. Did you know, Georgie, that the Government has come to me and the Opposition 15 times in the last five years saying we have to update the laws. We have said OK, we are up for keeping Australians safe, that is - we are all in this together and we all share that absolute priority. But we had to make up to 300 changes because the detail wasn't right. So we will study the fine print. I just want to reassure Australians that we don't see national security as a political football. Let's do it right the first time and let's keep Australians safe.
 
INTERVIEWER: It needs a multi-pronged approach, doesn't it? What else do you propose to do?
 
SHORTEN: In terms of national security?
 
INTERVIEWER: Yeah. 
 
SHORTEN: We want to make sure that our defence spending is up to 2 per cent of our national economy. We are committed to making sure that we properly fund our national security agencies and the Federal Police. It also means working with the community. There are some absolute radical hot heads in the Muslim community but I am not going to start bagging the whole Muslim Australian community. I think we all need to work
together in this and I am confident that we can do, we can do better. But I've also got a high degree of confidence in what our existing security agencies are doing.
 
INTERVIEWER: Can you repeat what happened in Victoria over the weekend?
 
SHORTEN: Well, that will be up to the people of Australia, but I think our message is one which resonates. It is the same message that Dan Andrews offered in Victoria - better hospitals, better schools. Let's get on -
 
INTERVIEWER: Are you -
 
SHORTEN: Yes, I am confident that we have got positive policies and we don't need to go down the negative divisive path. One difference between me and the current Government - we are united. I can promise Australians that we are a united party, we have been united for over five years. We are not consumed by infighting. That's one thing I know the other team cannot offer.
 
INTERVIEWER: Are you our next Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: That will be up to the Australian people, Georgie but if I am, I won't let you or the Australian people down. We're going to focus on the people, not on ourselves. 
 
INTERVIEWER: We appreciate your time this morning, Bill Shorten. Thank you.
 
SHORTEN: All right, good chat. Thank you.

INTERVIEWER: Well Federal Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins us now. Mr Shorten, good evening to you.
 
SHORTEN Good evening Lisa.
 
INTERVIEWER: You’ve got to tell us, do you own a Burberry trench coat at this point, and if you do, I’d get rid of it very quickly.
 
SHORTEN: No, I haven’t quite got around to that.
 
INTERVIEWER: Right, that's probably a very good move. It was a huge result though. No one predicted such a wipe out as this. Do you think it happened because Labor was so good, the Opposition was so bad, or do you think a lot of it has got to do with what’s happening at the Federal level?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, full credit to Daniel Andrews and the State Labor Government. They submitted their record and got a renewed mandate, a bigger mandate, so nothing takes away from that. I travel around Victoria, I live in Victoria, there’s no doubt though that the Labor message; better schools, better hospitals, not more cuts and chaos and division, that’s what people are looking for. They just want us to get on with our jobs. That's all they want.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, you are in Canberra now. Let’s just be honest, are you measuring up the drapes in the Lodge? What’s going on?
 
SHORTEN: No. You know I did the shopping today in Moonee Ponds where I live and people were saying bring on the Federal Election, and some people would say that Labor has it in the bag, Idon't think that at all. How the Liberal Party interpret this loss is up to them, and I’m not going to spend a lot of time talking about the Government or the Prime Minister. What people want from me and what people want from politics in general is focus on policies that help everyday people.
 
INTERVIEWER: But hypothetically, would you think about putting heat lamps in the bathroom?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah no, that’s somewhere with the Burberry trench coat. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Dan Andrews has said the Victorian State Government is the most progressive state government in the country. Does that mean that Matthew Guy would have had a better chance if his last name was Mathew non-binary?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I think what happened is that people just want you to get on with the job. I don’t think everyone agrees with everything that Labor says, and people don’t agree with everything the Liberals say. What they want in their politicians in 2018 and next year, is that you’re just getting on with business. Are you going to look after the kids and provide universal preschool? Have we got enough aged care places for older Australians? Have we got good public transport to deal with congestion? Have you got a plan to deal with renewable energy and getting the power bills down? People just want us to get on with things that affect them, not always slagging each other off like we’re at the footy in the outer.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill, I know you don’t want to get carried away with expectations ahead of next year’s election, but if things go on as they are, you will be our next Prime Minister and I feel bad asking you this, because I think we have to ask you every time you come on. You’re the least of the preferred Prime Ministers, what are you going to do between now and the election to make us all feel excited about you being the Prime Minister?
 
SHORTEN: Oh Hamish, I think there is a little bit of excitement in your heart, you just need to find it. Only a little though, let's not really debate that. It's all about the ideas, it's about people, like I am excited -
 
INTERVIEWER: It is a little bit about you, you've got to admit that, and you know you've got not that much time until the next election.
 
SHORTEN: Well I tell you what the numbers on me were the same before the State Election as they are now, but we’re doing pretty well. We’re doing well because we focus on people. I’m not - more and more I've decided between now and the election, talk less about the government and more about the people. People just want us to get on with our job, and you know, when your kids can't get an apprenticeship or your kids in their 20s and 30s are trying to buy their first home and they haven't got enough for the deposit because that house – the price of housing is high. That’s what people are worried about, isn’t it?
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, well what about your sausage eating style, could that play into it? On Saturday, you know, you were doing a better job of it after going for the sideways bite. Do you think you can get it together before the next election? The important issues.

SHORTEN: Sarah, you know, it’s about time we buried the sausage scandal of 2016. I did eat it sideways but, you know I had very good reasons. Because the crusty bread - it was like a loaf, not a bit of proper bread. You needed the teeth of jaws to eat it, you know. Anyway, you don't want to get too many carbs do you? Whatever.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, thank you very much.
 
SHORTEN: See you guys. Thank you.


 
SHORTEN: It's about time we had the renewables revolution. We're proposing to make it easier for households to buy solar powered batteries. What that means is if you've got solar panels on the roof, and nearly 2 million households already do, we want to make it easier for you to get the batteries so that you can store that energy and be able to use it at night time. The experts say that if you have batteries and the solar panels you can see savings of between 60 and even up to 90 per cent. These numbers sound unreal, but that's where the future is. So we want to help people be able to get batteries and we want to start the renewables revolution for lower prices. 
 
STEFANOVIC: Okay renewables revolution, so it will start with what, 100,000 homes?
 
SHORTEN: Yes. There's already 50,000 batteries installed around Australia. We want to see by 2025 a million households have batteries. We're not going to buy the batteries for people. They're going to have to still find the money and borrow the money, but we just want to put a little bit of incentive into the system so we can have a battery manufacturing industry in Australia, so we can give people control over their power prices. We've got to start getting on with climate change action. Power prices are out-of-control, climate change, nothing is getting fixed. This is a sensible way where we help families and help the kids in the future. 
 
STEFANOVIC: How much are the batteries?
 
SHORTEN: At the moment they can be north of $10,000, so they're certainly not cheap. Over the life of the battery installation people get the value back. So that's why we're giving a modest amount. I think if we just paid for the whole battery it wouldn't be appreciated. This is just a small incentive, but something, it all helps in the final analysis.
 
STEFANOVIC: This is going to take a while. It's not exactly a renewable revolution if only 100,000 people can do it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, there's no doubt that it's going to take a while, but we've got to start. I think renewable energy and climate change is something where the Australian people are so far ahead of the politicians it's not funny. What I'm going to do, is I'm going to catch up. If we form a government, because that's got to be the first step of the change, we want to work with families and businesses to get their power prices down, and just talking about climate change and is it real, that doesn't help anyone. Let's get on with it and do it. The people are already voting with their feet. 
 
STEFANOVIC: I just don't know how many people are going to be able to afford the $10,000. How long will it be before the batteries have paid back the initial investment?
 
SHORTEN: Well, between five to six years, we've seen the recoup in the solar panels. They'll get cheaper, and also what we'll see is people - do you know,  in the next two or three weeks, Karl, we're going to pass the 2 million household mark who have got solar on the roofs? So, I've got no doubt this is the future and we're going to start steering the nation to the future and work with Aussie families. I mean, the power prices are out-of-control mate and this government hasn't done a thing really.
 
STEFANOVIC: What difference will it make in terms of power supply on the grid?
 
SHORTEN: Well, this is the other good news - what it's going to mean is if you can store the energy during the day - say the family watching the show this morning, the kids go off to school, mum and dad might go to work - what happens is at the moment, if you have just got solar panels, you don't get the energy when you need it which is in the evenings, when the kids turn computers on and you need the energy. The beauty of the batteries is that the energy is going to be there when you need it not just when the sun is shining. I think it's actually a very conservative solution. Renewable energy plus storage equals reliable cheap energy.
 
STEFANOVIC: Ok, this is 7 years. Have you thought about cheaper ways to reach your energy targets? Will there be a carbon tax under a government you lead?
 
SHORTEN: No. What we will do though is we're going to pick up what Malcolm Turnbull proposed. He and the Government looked at what is called a National Energy Guarantee. Industry likes it, everyone likes it. Of course, they got rid of poor old Malcolm. But we've decided rather than reinvent the wheel, we'll go with a National Energy Guarantee. I'm giving a talk at lunch time today where I’m going to outline how we do that. The Government's own modelling shows that will decrease energy bills by about $550 so that all makes a difference.
 
STEFANOVIC: South Australia made a big shift towards renewables and we all know how that ended and how reliable their power was - can you guarantee this power will be just as reliable as to what we have now.
 
SHORTEN: First of all, just on the South Australian business, that was cyclonic winds blew over power towers. The fact of the matter is that what we're going to do - and then they put in this Tesla battery which did give them reliability. What we want to do is three things: lower the prices, take real action on climate change and ensure reliability. Batteries for households is the missing link. It's reliable because you can store energy built during the day and then you can use it at night-time. It's a good solution.
 
STEFANOVIC: So power bills will be cheaper, will be less under Labor?

SHORTEN: There's no doubt that if we back renewable energy, renewable energy is cheaper than existing forms of power in the future.

STEFANOVIC: Ok, let's move on. Scott Morrison is on electoral winner it seems regarding shrinking migration levels. What does that number look like to you, do you think?

SHORTEN: Well, there's two ingredients, aren't there? First of all, there's permanent migration. The current Prime Minister says that he will lower the cap from 190,000 to 160,000. Miraculously, that is what permanent migration is - it's 160,000. So, we're not going to have a big argument with them about that. 
 
But the real missing part of the story is there's 1.6 million people temporarily in Australia with visas that give them work rights. You can't just look at permanent migration without discussion about the fact that we're importing a whole lot of temporary labour to do jobs when Australians can do that work. 

The other thing is that this whole population debate is borne out of frustration of congestion in our big cities. If you want to fix congestion, don't cut funding to schools so you don't have overcrowded schools, don't cut funding to hospitals so you don't have overcrowded hospitals and invest in public transport. 

If you like, the debate Mr Morrison is having is part of picture but it's one of the piece of jigsaw and we've offered to work on the Government on a bipartisan basis and it's all about congestion. Let's get our cities unblocked again.

STEFANOVIC: Finally and really quickly, the Prime Minister is trying to get together with Muslim leaders to try and sort through some of the angst and the division that is out there. Surely, it is upon Muslim leaders to get to the table with the Prime Minister otherwise those divisions will surely get worse?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I've got a general rule in life that you’re always better talking than having a standoff. It would be better if the leaders turned up. I don't think you solve anything by sitting in different rooms. I also have to say though that most of the Muslim community are very very law-abiding. What we're talking about is Islamist ideology. Let's not tar the whole subpopulation with the actions of the crazy few. But it would be better if people turned up and spoke. I always think that's the best way to do it, that's how you solve the problem - sit around the table.

STEFANOVIC: Bill Shorten, thanks for your time.

SHORTEN: Good on you, Karl. Have a lovely day.

INTERVIEWER: Labor has announced details of it's long awaited energy policy. Bill Shorten is looking to keep Malcolm Turnbull's National Energy Guarantee but with a higher emissions reduction target. The plan also includes targets for Aussie homes, Labor wants one million household battery installations by 2025. To help achieve that there would be a $2000 rebate from 2020 for households on incomes of less than $180,000 per year, to help them fund the purchase and installation. 
 
Labor Leader Bill Shorten joins me now. Alright, big question from most households $2000 bucks back, how much does it cost to put in the batteries and the solars?
 
SHORTEN Battery packages can cost between $3000 and north of $10,000. They're getting cheaper every day, our incentive is not designed to pay for the whole production, people have got to make an effort themselves. We just want to put a bit of incentive so that people can get on with the renewables revolution. 

Batteries are the energy source of the future - solar do you know, in the next couple of weeks they'll be two million Australian households which have got solar on their roofs. Let's get the batteries so it can work 24 hours a day.
 
INTERVIEWER: So even though conservative politicians bag renewables, the actual Australian public is adopting it.
 
SHORTEN: Let's say it as it is, the Australian people are so far ahead of the politicians on renewable energy it's not a joke but what I am going to do if we get elected is we're backing renewables, we're backing the batteries, we want people to get between a 60 and 90 per cent reduction off their household bills. That's what you get over the lifetime of installing batteries and solar. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Okay so you put the $3000 to $10,000 battery in, you get $2000 back but it will cut your power bill by 80 to 90 per cent?
 
SHORTEN: Well all of the research we've seen and the evidence - between 60 and 90 per cent, I mean you heard that right. I don't own shares in a battery company or a solar company, I'm just interested in getting household power bills down. I mean they're just out of control, it drives people nuts. You get your fortnightly pay and then you get every two months you get the power bill - out of control, batteries it's the way to go.
 
INTERVIEWER: Interesting policy. Alright Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us.

SHORTEN Great to be on your show.
 
INTERVIEWER: Fantastic to have you on and thank you for your time. We know you're a very busy man.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill, did you really think we would be here celebrating one year since the Yes result?

SHORTEN: Yes, I thought the vote would be successful but what I realised on the morning of the vote being declared was the amount of pressure that a lot of people - LGBTQ people felt because what it was is this silly process which got the right outcome. It put a lot of pressure on our fellow Australians. And the pressure was this, all of a sudden your relationships, your choices were going to be the subject to an opinion poll of friends and strangers alike.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well the people who bullied us at school - that's how I looked at, those people that bullied me were going to now make the decision.
 
SHORTEN: It was just madness. My view is that people's relationships are their own business. And also, under our system of Parliament, we make laws. Why is it that when it came to gay people, all of a sudden we had to have a special law making process? It just seemed to me, weak. 
 
But having said that, let's also switch to the positive. I mean it was a hard campaign. I remember at the local theatre near where I live, a lot of the staff were wearing badges supporting marriage equality and there's a big intersection at the front of the road and it was a school holidays and I was taking my then seven year old and her little friend to see a play. And there were some No case protesters - of course it was my good luck to run into them because there weren't that many of them - but they were all holding in their wobble boards and their views. And they started telling me off with more intensity, that my seven year old daughter would grow up to be a 17 year old boy. And I'm just looking at -
 
INTERVIEWER: Outrageous. 
 
SHORTEN: I did say to them: listen, you're the reason why the vote is going to go down. Which wasn't necessarily diplomatic -
 
INTERVIEWER: But that's hard not to when they're attacking your child. 
 
SHORTEN: Of course not. I just thought it was wrong and so, that was only a tiny taste. I just say it to just remind people that perhaps now as the memory recedes, people think it was all this sort of joyful process - it wasn't.
 
INTERVIEWER: No.
 
SHORTEN: But we got the right outcome. That day, in front of the State Library was awesome.
 
INTERVIEWER: Fantastic. 
 
SHORTEN: And did you know since then - what is it? 5,420 marriages have occurred. That's good.
 
INTERVIEWER: Correct. We will be talking to someone later on to actually talk about the financial impact that marriage equality has had. You know, spending more money. I tell you what, us gays know how to do it and we're going to spend extra money on shoes, let me tell you.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill, originally the Marriage Act of 1961 had no definition of who could or couldn't get married in Australia. Why was it so easy for Prime Minister John Howard to amend the Marriage Act to prevent same sex marriages in 2004 yet it took so much effort and this public survey to change it back?
 
SHORTEN: Well good point. I think back in 2004, the then Labor Party in Parliament felt a bit stampeded. So yeah, I don't think they got that call right. Although, people like Tanya and others registered their concern at the time. 
 
It shouldn't have been as hard as it was. You're quite right. You know, there have been something like 20 changes to the Marriage Act which hadn't required a plebiscite. 
 
INTERVIEWER: No, never. 
 
SHORTEN: Anyway, so we get the hypocrisy of the process but today's a good day. It's a year on. You know, I always said to people that the sun will come up, you know the chickens will still lay eggs, the curtains won't fade and cows will still be milking. We're all going to realise once the vote happened in Parliament, what was the fuss all about. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Absolutely, the sky didn't fall in.
 
INTERVIEWER: No but it was hard. And I'm going to say, you know, Wayne and I have been on TV on Gogglebox, we became poster boys for hate. We got so many private messages but I had to realise that as an older Australian, an LGBTI, I had to take that on board for the younger generation and we walked through it very well. But I'm going to say, that night what a relief because I was stressing -
 
SHORTEN: It was a relief. That was the point. The pressure was taken off your shoulders you'd submitted your relationships and identity involuntarily to the opinion of your peers, Australia could have either made a fool of itself or not and we didn't.
 
INTERVIEWER: Look we are going to thank you for it - getting the Labor Party on board as well as the trade unions. You really, guys coming out there, you were there at every rally we saw you. It made a difference to the average working Australian, so look, thank you for that.
 
SHORTEN: Well I made the decision, when they first proposed having the plebiscite I thought it was the wrong process, I thought it was an abdication of leadership but then I thought why on earth should we let some Australians go through this process on their own. And so that's why we decided to strongly encourage participation because we couldn't leave people on their own. 

INTERVIEWER: Well you are the leaders of the country and we do look towards Canberra to lead us and thank you for standing up and doing it.


SHORTEN: Occasionally we do.


INTERVIEWER: Well I mean that's what we're meant to do, that's what we stand there and do you know?


SHORTEN: That's right.


INTERVIEWER: Bill there's some significant issues facing the world at the moment, climate change being one of the biggest. We wasted over a year being distracted by same sex marriage, what could have been done quite quickly you know there's Safe Schools, keeping people in detention, there's other preoccupations of this current government. As a nation do you think we fear change and have we dropped the ball on major new economic opportunities that the rest of the world is developing? 


SHORTEN: I think that we can miss out on what's happening around the world, you know climate change and the investment in renewables is one example but I think your question is going to a deeper point. Is change too hard in Australia and I don't think it is. 

I just think the quality of advocacy has got to lift, the amount of preparation you put in the case must change, must improve. I think Australians are up for a vision of the future. I think Australians want to see their political leaders explain not only what we think we'll do next Monday but what do we think Australia will look like in the 2030s and 2040s. They don't expect leaders - political leaders in this country to be in their lounge room - unlike Gogglebox - telling us what to think but they do expect us to be partners in the journey to know where the future is and to help the nation navigate to it, make the big calls. 


INTERVIEWER: Well when the politicians are talking to the average person we then feel part of the process, we then can move along with you, we understand what laws are changing, why we're moving in that direction, if we're just thrown stupid law at us we're going to fight them back.
 
SHORTEN: Well a good analogy I've always used because when I was a union rep sometimes we'd have to have change in workplaces was quite often  I saw corporate leaders say to everyone - use the analogy of a railway station - you're at railway station A and the corporate leaders would say righto to the workforce, you've got to get to railway station B. 

And then they'd hop in the train at the front and drive off and halfway between A and B they'd look out and see everyone else, the work force would be back at railway station A because no one had explained to them where they fit in. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Okay yeah.
 
SHORTEN: You've got to tell people where they fit in. Change is not too hard but you do have to make sure that you don't leave people behind.
 
INTERVIEWER: And that's right people are scared.


SHORTEN: And if you don't have an explanation for how you're going to educate the kids or look after the sick or deal with our environment or make sure that we've got economic growth which is in the interests of everyone not just the lucky few, then people are going to say, they're going to look for more extreme solutions and just say no, we're not interested in this version of change which doesn't have a place for us in it. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And then we ended up with the extremist political parties coming in who seem to be getting all the airtime. They seem to be the ones that cop it.

SHORTEN: It's always possible to get airtime if you're willing to say silly things but if you want to have a strong, sensible, centrist debate and this is what Mr Turnbull perhaps missed the opportunity to do, he came in with a lot of good will, is you have to lead but you can lead from the centre. You don't have to say extreme things to get things done. You know, but you've got to explain to people and you've got to think it through. I reckon people are smart and if you put the case in front of them, you say why you're doing it, this is where you fit in, this is where we're going to end up, this is what we want the place to be like, people - not everyone is going to agree with you but most people give you points for trying. 

INTERVIEWER: If people see a direction they're happy and that's what you said, you explain where you're taking us, why you're going and if it's not going to work in 12 months, 2 years, 3 years we reevaluate and move back through. We don't just go - 
 
SHORTEN: Well we set up the National Disability Insurance Scheme when I was last in government. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Well done. And that was fantastic.
 
SHORTEN: And it didn't exist before we got there but I spent a lot of time talking to people with disability and their careers and then we built up a coalition of people who really wanted to see a better deal.
 
The actual politics of it was five per cent. It's building up the community support for the proposition. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And Australia always has been a country where we've taken care of the underprivileged or those who are unable to take care of themselves.
 
SHORTEN: But it's interesting, when you get off a plane at Tullamarine or at Mascot when you come from overseas, whilst you've enjoyed your visit overseas you know there's things about this country we're proud of, but we don't - when we get back to Australia - when we're overseas do we talk about our Medicare system or our tax deductions?
 
INTERVIEWER: Well we talk about Medicare. 
 
SHORTEN: Of course.
 
INTERVIEWER: We talk about the wonderful things that we do.
 
SHORTEN: We talk about a strong minimum wage, we don't talk about the top two percent of Australians not having to pay tax. It's interesting what we're proud of. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill if elected you've committed $10 million towards construction of the Victorian Pride Centre. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Yay well done!
 
INTERVIEWER: You've also promised $600,000 towards building new digital studios for this radio station.
 
INTERVIEWER: Yes, and you can see we've shown you Joy is falling apart, and I promise I won't spend that $600 grand on my shoes. It will go to proper things here at Joy. 
 
SHORTEN: It mightn't be enough, I get that so - 
 
INTERVIEWER: Do you think the marriage equality debate highlighted the need for such community outlets? 
 
SHORTEN: Yes, we've got to have more diversity in our media, got to hear more voices, can't just be the same old couple of large media companies in Australia. We've got to have more diversity. That's why I'm such a strong fan of the ABC. But I think your radio station caters to a market, it provides an alternative voice, and I think that's healthy. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Definitely. And that's - when you're talking about the ABC at moment, I mean, they're in a bit of shambles. We don't want to go near there, but it is very important that that is protected because we all know as an Australian, we don't trust the other networks.
 
SHORTEN: We need an independent national broadcaster.  
 
INTERVIEWER: And they were the most trusted news outlet in the country. 
 
SHORTEN: They still are. They still are. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Are we still trusting them?
 
SHORTEN: I think we are, but I think some of the shenanigans at the top level and the personality conflicts has left people disillusioned, but the way we will get around that is that we'll just go back to a more independent process to pick the senior leadership of the ABC. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Excellent.
 
SHORTEN: Politicians out, independent transparent process in.
 
INTERVIEWER: You've likened political interference in the ABC to a dictatorship, we're sick of the ABC bias towards Playschool. We want Mr Squiggle back. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Oh really? Are you about getting (inaudible)?
 
INTERVIEWER: Yep, absolutely.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well - 
 
SHORTEN: Maybe we need to have a plebiscite  - I don't know.
 
INTERVIEWER: No, let's waste some more money - 
 
SHORTEN: That's an issue for a plebiscite. 
 
INTERVIEWER: But I was reading this morning on the train that your lovely Deputy, Tanya Plibersek, actually is putting through a Senate Bill to actually try and remove the discrimination for the religious schools.
 
SHORTEN: Yes, she and Penny and myself, we think that the time has come to revisit that. What's happened is that over time we've started to provide protection against sex discrimination. What's happened is as that wheel has turned there was still some exemptions to that law in place, one of them was schools. I think now the debate is coming - really, what's the point of having a clumsy exemption. This is not about schools not being able to manage their employees, and that's fair enough. We're going to have proper consultation, proper chat with those bodies, but the idea that you just rely simply on a crude outmoded exemption to anti-discrimination laws, it's run it's race, now I think we need to be smarter and cleverer and fairer. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Well we do need to do something because our now Prime Minister, what's his name again? I can't keep up with which one we've got.
 
INTERVIEWER: Scott Morrison?
 
INTERVIEWER: Yes, who promised that during the Wentworth election that he would have that removed within two weeks after that there. Hasn't happened.
 
SHORTEN: Well, maybe - but he hasn't moved to embassy either, so - 
 
INTERVIEWER: No.
 
INTERVIEWER: So, I mean as you are going to be Australia's next Prime Minister - 
 
SHORTEN: Oh, we don't know that yet. We're working very hard on it.
 
INTERVIEWER: In the latest Newspoll Labor is ahead of the Coalition on a two party preferred basis, 55-45 meaning you and Labor would win any election held today. We've got Scott Morrison, he's got his bus up in Queensland, are you going to have a bus with - 
 
SHORTEN: We had a bus long before Scott had it, and we've even been on the bus!
 
INTERVIEWER: You have been on the bus. 
 
INTERVIEWER: That's really good, but -
 
SHORTEN: But we don't take this election for granted at all. 
 
INTERVIEWER: No.
 
SHORTEN: We want to put forward positive views. Some people say the Government's such a disorganised shambles, just sit back and buy a box of popcorn, but the point is that puts more pressure on us, because people think the system is broken. And they want to see us produce better policies and better ideas, so that's the pressure we have - to demonstrate to people that politics can work in the interests or ordinary people.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well do you know what, I've put a bet on, one of those Sportsbets, I think I've got like a 1000:1, that you'll have a different Prime Minister that you'll be going up against. What's the bet that he'll still be there when the time comes?
 
SHORTEN: The place would erupt if if they rolled him. 
 
INTERVIEWER: But is this true, this is what we want  to see - 
 
SHORTEN: Mind you, I didn't think they'd roll Malcolm, so what would I know. 
 
INTERVIEWER: No. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill, importantly, according to a La Trobe University study, 80 per cent of homophobic bullying involving LGBTI young people occurs at schools, and has a profound impact on their wellbeing and education as you can imagine, let alone the ongoing impact on their adult life. Will you be open to funding a national Safe School's program again?
 
SHORTEN: We're committed to putting in place anti-bulling programs. Keeping kids safe shouldn't be the matter of the politics that it is. We'll obviously talk to everyone about what are the best programs, but we start from the position kids have got a right to go to school and be safe. And once that is your guiding principle, and by the way, most school administrators think that, most parents think that, I'm sure we can get it. I get frustrated by this debate that it's X, Y or Z programs, and they're all sinister, that's not right. The motivation for me and I think 99 percent of Australia is make sure that kids are safe when they go to school and any parent will know, it's not just sexuality they can be bullied on, and we've just got to keep kids safe. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Yep. Very much true. Look, thank you so much for coming in and talking to us today.
 
INTERVIEWER: Absolutely.
 
SHORTEN: Super. Thank you. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Look, the money is fantastic, you know you've got my vote - well you've definitely got out vote. 
 
SHORTEN: That's good.
 
INTERVIEWER: And it's not just that, but the Pride Centre is going to be a very important thing.
 
SHORTEN: It'll be great. Long overdue. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Yes. Look thank you so much for your time.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, thanks for your time this morning on this important one year anniversary of the "yes" result. 
 
SHORTEN: Yes it's good. It's really good.
 
INTERVIEWER: And thank you for your help.
 
SHORTEN: No, it was everyone. It was a collective effort.

INTERVIEWER: With an election looming and the Prime Minister's approval rating at an all time low, Labor has launched its bidding for your vote. Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins me now live from Melbourne. Good morning to you Bill.
 
SHORTEN Good morning Karl. 
 
STEFANOVIC: Okay, let's start with the business end of things. You've promised to crack down on multinational tax loopholes for companies and individuals. Easier said than done isn't it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, it is certainly easier said than done, but we have got to do it. I don't think most Australians waking up this morning realise that some corporations and some high net wealthy - very wealthy, wealthy individuals are dodging about $5 billion in tax over the next ten years by basically going to tax havens. And what I mean by that is, that there are some Australians who are able to claim citizenship or residency of another country, a low tax jurisdiction, and even though they earn money here they shuffle their money around and they pay practically no tax in these tax havens, these Caribbean Islands etc. I mean they even are able to fly over and inspect their tax accounts, in these tax havans and claim that back off the Australian taxpayer. So we are going to shut down the loopholes. The other thing we are going to do is we're going to reward whistleblowers. So if you are doing something dodgy with your tax overseas and a whistleblower comes forward, the whistleblower is going to share some of the reward. So it just means that for everyone who is not doing the right thing by tax, it means that someone who knows what they are doing, could well get some more money by giving you up. That way we think that we're going to get our multinationals -
 
STEFANOVIC: A lot of these wealthy individuals get themselves lawyered up and you're talking about international boundaries and international laws here. I think it's unfair Aussie businesses pay full freight as well but it's been like that for a long time. How exactly are you going to - how specifically are you going to shut them down? 
 
SHORTEN: We're going to change the laws and we're going to put the resources to enforce the laws. If you want to crack down on multinationals and very, very wealthy people not paying their tax, who do you trust? The Liberal Party who spent most of their time in government wanting to give them tax cuts, or the Labor Party who wants to properly fund our schools and hospitals? When it comes to this, there's only one party you can trust to clean it up and that's the Labor Party.
 
STEFANOVIC: Okay, and nothing specific though?
 
SHORTEN: Well we are putting forward a series of recommendations. Changing the law on whistleblowers, changing the ability of companies to mask or hide what they are doing. We are going to ask them to be much more transparent in their reporting. So we are very going to put forward a series - and we put them forward today, very specific proposals which international tax experts say are best practice to clamp down on all the money going overseas, rather than paying for our schools and our roads and our hospitals.
 
STEFANOVIC: It would be good to clean up those multinationals who are using those loopholes, it would be a good thing. Okay, there are reports also this morning you are going to increase the dole after you get elected, is that true?
 
SHORTEN: What we have said is that we are going to review the Newstart allowance. It is, in my opinion too low. You don't review something to cut it. We don't know what number will come up - that we’ll get at the end of the review, that's why we're having the review. But I'm not going to stand here and say that someone on $260 a week is doing it easy, they're simply not.
 
STEFANOVIC: The flip side will be that people out there say, hang on a second you don't want to encourage people to be on the dole. 
SHORTEN: Of course we want people to get off the dole and get a job. But you know, this sort of simple view that you either starve people in order to make them get off the dole, it's just not as straightforward as that. No, our priority is to make sure people find a job. Our priority is to make sure that we encourage people to work, they have got the skills to work, they've got the attitude to work. But at the same time, I'm not going to start kicking a person who is down in the head, am I? That's what we do when we just say bad luck.
 
STEFANOVIC: You are aren't spending too much already are you?
 
SHORTEN: No, what we are able to do is we are prioritising schools and hospitals over creating richer multinationals and more tax minimisers in you know, Caribbean Islands. That's how we pay for our promises. We want to make sure - everyone has got to live within there their means, but what annoys me is that there is one rule for some and another rule for most other people. What we want to do is make sure that we've got a fair tax system which is one which covers everyone and treats everyone the same. 
 
STEFANOVIC: The reality is Bill, you don't actually need to do anything. You don't need to be on our show, you don't need to say anything, you just need to be quiet and you will win the next election. 
 
SHORTEN: Well, some people say that to me. But with the division and the instability of the government, the fact that the Liberals sacked Malcolm Turnbull nine weeks ago, then they have got to send him to Bali to clean up the new Prime Minister's foreign policy mess, the chaos has got to end. But what I'm not going to do is just do that by doing nothing. We need to that demonstrate to Australian people that the system can work. That at least one of the major parties is working on policies for the future.
 
STEFANOVIC: You don't want to run the risk of bringing yourself undone though, I mean you're in the box seat, you've basically won the race.
 
SHORTEN: No, it's still got a long way to go. That would be too arrogant to just assume that the election is over. No, what I want to do is restore people's faith in the system. For me the reason why I want to be Prime Minister is to hand on a better deal to our kids. That's why today we are announcing that we will – that we can explain to every school in Australia, the extra funding for the extra tutoring for kids who are doing really well and the kids who are falling behind. And the reason why we can make promises on that -or reducing waiting lists, properly funding our hospitals, making sure that kids can get apprenticeships, is that we are cracking down on the multinationals and the big end of town. We just want to have the same set of rules for all Aussies.
 
STEFANOVIC: Happy Halloween to you this morning. Are you going trick or treating this arvo with the kids? Maybe you could go around Malcolm's house, he has got plenty of goodies for the government.
 
SHORTEN: I don't know if he is back from Bali yet, with the old mop, cleaning up Mr Morrison's problems. But no, I'm going trick or treating. My little daughter made me ring all the parents of her friends to make sure they knew what time to be here. And it's a big deal, I mean I know people don't like the commercialisation some days, but I have to say, this is one of the unusual times in the year where the kids get out - I  mean parents watching, and they go and talk to the neighbours. I like the atmosphere of Halloween.
 
STEFANOVIC: I don't mind it either. Good on you Bill, thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Maybe not the lollies. See you, bye.

INTERVIEWER: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten will today launch an action plan for Labor, designed to set him apart from Scott Morrison, with a set of key values that he'll take to the election, due next year. 
 
INTERVIEWER: And the Opposition Leader joins us live now from Melbourne. Good morning to you, Bill Shorten. Thanks for being with us. Just give us in a nutshell what you're going to be telling Australia later today? What is in your manifesto? 
 
SHORTEN Good morning, well a lot of people are coming up to me at the moment and saying, Labor has to do nothing and just watch the Liberals implode, but I actually think people want more from politics than just the business as usual. So what we're going to do today is launch a positive, Fair Go Action Plan for Australia. 
 
It has got five features; we want to fix up our schools and hospitals, we want to stand up for workers, we want to ease the pressure on family budgets, we want to make sure that
the economy is strong and works for everyone and we want to invest in cleaner energy - cleaner and cheaper energy. We think that this is the bones of a really positive plan that take Australia into the next decade. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, on that third point, standing up for workers. Sally McManus and the ACTU is launching a campaign today about - a new union campaign about sector-wide bargaining. Where does parliamentary Labor, where does your party stand on that? 
 
SHORTEN: We haven't finalised our position, but I think that the unions and indeed a lot of people from the Reserve Bank onwards, are all saying that everything is going up in Australia except wages. The system is not working in that what is happening is that corporate profits are going up, some people are doing very well thank you very much. But
for millions of everyday Aussies, they have not had a wage rise in absolute ages, since the Coalition Government has been elected. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Yeah, that's the big issue out there but can you legislate? Can you use the Parliament to ensure wages go up? 
 
SHORTEN: I think there are some things that we can do -
 
INTERVIEWER: Like what? 
 
SHORTEN: We can legislate to restore the penalty rates on Sundays and public holidays that have been cut. We can also put in place measures which will encourage closing the gender pay gap. You know of course Mark, that women in Australia earn on average 15 to 17 per cent less than men and I think there are measures we can do to help improve the deal. And indeed this week, on Thursday, we unveiled our early childhood learning plans which will see universal access for all three and four year olds. Part of that will provide a better deal for early childhood educators who are underpaid at the moment in Australia.
 
INTERVIEWER: Yes ok, you were announcing that during the week. Listen Labor is managing to stay ahead in the opinion polls Bill, yet you are less popular than Scott Morrison. What do you think? Is it style or substance that is the problem?
 
SHORTEN: Well I actually think that people want to look beyond the next opinion poll to what are we going to do for them and their families. The reason why I want to be Prime Minister Monique, is I want Australia to hand on a better deal to the next generation than the one we received from our parents. This to me, is at the essence of the fair go. The fair go is the best way to hand on a better deal to future generations. I think that when we look at the ideas and policies, the Liberals have been in now for five years, they have run out of ideas. Labor has a view which says, a fair go to everyone and that will hand on a better deal to future generations. That's what we're in it for.
 
INTERVIEWER: You have got your five-point plan today, Scott Morrison is going to release a four-point 'blueprint' - so you are one point up, to tackle population policy on Tuesday. You have called for a bipartisan approach to immigration yet I don't see any consensus in your Caucus, I don't see any in the Government party room. How do you get bipartisanship between the parties in the Parliament on immigration and population policy? 
 
SHORTEN: Well I  think that successive governments over the decades have tried to tackle this issue of big cities being overcrowded. How do we get immigrants to go to the bush? Now, what I have said to Scott Morrison is, let's take this issue out of the political colosseum, the political bear-pit, let's work together. That is what people stop me in the street and say to me, there are big issues, Bill - issues for the next decade and beyond, when will you guys just work together? So I am absolutely prepared to be constructive with the current Prime Minister. I mean, I was willing to work with Tony Abbott and then I was willing to work with Malcolm Turnbull, so I am happy to try the new fellow too, but I think we need to get on and put the politics aside, don't we, Mark.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright. Just before we let you go, Australia has woken up to five different time zones this morning. Is it time for the daylight saving chaos to end in this country?
 
SHORTEN: Well, let's sort out population, cost of living, workers’ rights, build a strong economy to make it work in the interest of everyone - 
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill, come on! We know our own Simon Reeve is beside himself about daylight savings, living in Queensland -
 
SHORTEN: Listen, I think some of our time zone differences are absolutely crazy, but I also know that every state has got very long held views on this issue. So let's start with immigration and cost of living and wages, then when we have done all of that, let's get on to daylight savings.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright, Bill. Well you're looking alright for one hour less sleep overnight. Thank you very much for being with us. 
 
SHORTEN: Thanks guys.
 
INTERVIEWER: Good on you. Thanks, Mr Shorten.

INTERVIEWER: We will get more for you now on the pledge by the Labor Party for government funded preschool for 3 year olds. We are joined by the Federal Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten who joins us from Moonee Ponds West Primary School in Melbourne. Mr Shorten good morning, thanks for joining us. 
 
SHORTEN Good morning, how are you?
 
INTERVIEWER: I'm well, thank you. It is an expensive program that you have announced here for 15 hours for 3 year olds now? 
 
SHORTEN: Yes, Labor believes that we need to fund more preschool. We need to give all 3 year olds and 4 year olds in Australia the best jump start to going into school. All the educational experts have made it very clear that a little child's development up to the age of 5 is very important. So Labor believes in investing in the learning and educational outcomes of 3 and 4 year olds. It will also help parents with the cost of paying for preschool and I think it will really, really make a massive change. It's re-imagining childcare into early childhood education. I think Australia, parents and the kids will all be the winners.
 
INTERVIEWER: Do you plan to fund this out of any savings that you plan to make to the Budget should you win government?
 
SHORTEN: As you'd be aware, Labor's been working hard from Opposition to identify how we can improve the bottom line of the Budget. That's why we are going to reform unsustainable tax concessions which principally flow to the very well-off and we want to reuse some of that money not just to pay down debt, not just to give tax refunds to people under $100,000, but we want to invest in passing on a better deal to the next generation than the one we received from our parents. That's why I want to be Prime Minister. I want to make sure that we are giving the best start in life to the next generation. We can afford to it because for the last five years we have been united, steady and stable and doing our homework.
 
INTERVIEWER: Well these are the next generation of the kids clearly matter to you according to that policy yet at the same time you stand here today and you won't promise to get 112 kids out of detention on Nauru despite the appalling mental health conditions their detention has created, despite calls from Australian doctors at the AMA, pediatricians, psychologists, so not all kids are equal hey?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, they are 2 different issues.
 
INTERVIEWER: They are both children, Mr Shorten. They are all children.
 
SHORTEN: Yes, I understand that linkage. But what I want to make clear and they are two separate issues. Is that it is a good idea to fund the two years of preschool, 15 hours a week, 600 hours a year of early learning for our children. And I think that whilst you make a point about Nauru, I think it is wrong to simply dismiss it and say well, "unless we do one, our preschool promise is not fair dinkum" - it is.
 
INTERVIEWER: Let me clarify Mr Shorten, it may be fair dinkum but you've still got on your hands the fact that you, and the Government, are prepared to let children languish in detention.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, and I said I'd come to that issue. I said there are two issues. But what I won't do is have someone simply dismiss a promise.
 
INTERVIEWER: It's not being dismissed.
 
SHORTEN: Thank you. In terms of the treatment of the children on Nauru, I have been watching very carefully what the AMA have been saying. It isn't acceptable that if children need medical treatment they should be left to languish on the Nauru. Full stop. So perhaps we don't disagree as much as you think we do. But for me, you can't just simply say that we are not focusing on children. I do think that actually that giving our kids the best possible start is incredibly important.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright, let's move on to something else, the ACTU Secretary, Sally McManus, has attacked enterprise bargaining as a failed system. She is giving a speech tonight in which she will say that it has exhausted its productivity benefits and is now about competing on wage costs. She says that the bargaining regime introduced by Labor has become, and these are her words, "narrow and inefficient" and she wants to see sector-wide bargaining rights and arbitration powers to fix that system. Given that wage growth is going to be a key battleground issue for the next election, is she right?
 
SHORTEN: There are a number of points in what you say. First of all, enterprise bargaining was introduced 25 years ago. It had delivered some pretty positive benefits for workers with lifts in real wages but there is no doubt in my mind, that in the last few years in particular, a lot of the rules about enterprise bargaining are creating one-sided outcomes and we are seeing wages growth stagnant. The fact of the matter is, that wherever I travel in Australia, people tell me everything is going up but their wages. So I think unions, and others, not just unions, have got a point that low wages growth is seeing the benefits of economic growth in Australia unfairly distributed. Or in plain English, the workers are getting left behind, corporate profits are up and we do need a better wages policy. So we will look very carefully at what Sally is saying and what other people are saying in this area. We have already proposed for your information, improvements to the system. We want to make sure that labour hire workers when they're working alongside direct employees at a company if they're doing work of the same skill and experience get the same pay. We want to reverse the cuts to penalty rates for 700,000 workers covered by awards where weekend rates have been cut and public holidays. So I think there is an important issue here.
 
INTERVIEWER: Yeah and as I mentioned earlier, clearly everyone's recognised you know, that the next election is going to be, if not largely on wage growth, and probably all about it, and who can claim that they can increase it will be the winner. If that's the case, then you really need the left of your party to stay on board with you, don't you? Instead, you have key unions reportedly this morning threatening to withdraw financial support because you continue to support, for example, the TPP. Can I ask you this morning on that news story which is in the Financial Review, how serious are those threats do you think?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, there are concerns that trade agreements provide some disadvantages as well as some advantages. I'm sympathetic to that complaint. The dilemma is that Labor's not the government, so we've got a government in power who is signing a trade agreement whose benefits, I would submit, are marginal. There are some benefits in higher education, to our agricultural sector, to steel, for example. But there are disadvantages in that there is an inadequate amount of what's called labour market testing or, in other words, there is concern expressed by people, including myself, that the Government is not doing enough to make sure that Australians get prioritised for first go for Australian jobs. The best way to fix this will be to have a Labor Government. We simply won't sign the sort of deals from government which this Government are doing but, you know, I guess it's a margin call. Do you stand in the way of some of the benefits? Do you make the good the enemy of the perfect? So on balance, we can see why, from Opposition, this agreement probably, on balance, has some advantages but it's not the sort of agreement we'd sign in government. 
 
The deeper point, though, which you went to is about unity of the party and about wages policy. My party's very unified and I think the runs are on the board for that fact. I'm on my third Liberal Prime Minister. The Liberal Party's a mess. They can't explain why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull. I think when it comes to wages policy, I've got a policy to help casuals. I've got a policy to help labour hire and I've got a policy to reverse penalty rate cuts. That will put me at least three points in policies ahead of the Government. Our announcement on early childhood learning today, I think that's going to make a generational change. You and many others and plenty of people complain there is no vision in politics. What we are doing is a policy which will have a benefit not next week but in the next generation of young people and giving them the best start.
 
INTERVIEWER: I get that and fair enough, but I do want to pick you up on a point you made there on the Government and them being a house divided.
 
SHORTEN: Oh yes.
 
INTERVIEWER: We have had that on your side, of course, but from my perspective, it is interesting this morning, looking at a whole suite of things going on in the country, growth at what 3.4 per cent which is damn healthy, you've got the AAA credit rating is back, employment is growing albeit part time but that's been the case for a long time now and some apparent stability now in the Government. Are you starting to be a little bit afraid that the election that appeared to be in your hands has now actually slipped through your fingers?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, the election hasn't been held.
 
INTERVIEWER: We're in election mode, though, clearly Mr Shorten.
 
SHORTEN: No, I'm not obsessed by the polls. I've never thought that the election was a foregone conclusion.
 
INTERVIEWER: Because you've never been popular with voters personally.
 
SHORTEN: Hang on, you have five questions there. Let's do them one at a time. One you said, do you think the election has slipped through our hands? It hasn't been held. There is no hubris or arrogance on our part. We are not going to be a small-target opposition. That's why we are announcing universal preschool for 3 and 4 year olds. We are putting forward alternative policies, we're not relying on the mistakes of the Government. 
 
You then also said in your prelude to your question that the Government is now stable. Well it is stable for at least a week. You have got ex-Prime Ministers from New York complaining bitterly, it's a pretty divided Party I don't think they are stable if you scratch the surface. 
 
And fundamentally, you said well the economy is growing and there are some positive headline numbers, true - but who is it growing for and in whose interests? The reality is that for workers in this country, they haven't seen a wage rise. That's what the ACTU is talking about. The benefits of growth in this country are not being fairly distributed. That's why we want to rather than tax concessions to the top end, we want to put universal preschool for 3 and 4 yearolds at the top of the chart because this country isn't working in the interests of everyone. Just for the lucky few.
 
INTERVIEWER: Good to talk to you this morning, Mr Shorten, thanks for making time for us.
 
SHORTEN: Lovely, cheerio.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten joins me now. Bill, good morning to you.
 
SHORTEN Good morning Karl. 
 
STEFANOVIC: Fill us in on the details of this one, how will it work?

SHORTEN: Well all the research and science and experts make it clear that the more early years learning we can give our kids before they go to school, it just absolutely, quantum improves their learning experience at schools. So Labor has made a decision that we want to offer universal preschool, 15 hours a week, 40 weeks of the year, to all three and four year olds in Australia. 

Some of the smartest countries in the world are doing it; Australia has fallen behind. So we want to do that. It will help parents with the cost three year old kindy and we'll be able to do it because we are winding back some of the unaffordable tax concessions at the top end which we currently pay to some Australians. I'd rather invest in the next generation of our kids. 

STEFANOVIC: I was going to ask you that, how are you going to fund it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, we've been doing a lot of hard work in the last five years as a united and stable opposition. We're not willing to face the next election and just rely on the Government's mistakes to get us across the line, our democratic system is too important.
 
We're going to offer a positive vision for the future and it starts by saying, let's give our kids 15 years of learning and education in Australia and we think this will make a really big difference to the next generation - a better deal.
 
STEFANOVIC: But just paying for it though, where are you going to get the money?
 
SHORTEN: Well we are winding back the negative gearing tax concessions on future houses and we are also making other changes to the system of taxation, which will see that some tax concessions which are given to the top end won't be so generous in the future, and instead we're going to use that money to educate the next generation of Australians.
 
STEFANOVIC: What will happen to the housing market if you do that?
 
SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we have said that if you currently negatively gear, you will keep negative gearing. So it has no change to any Australian watching this show today. 
 
But in the future we have to make a decision, do we want to give a tax break to a property investor purchasing their tenth house or do we want to make sure that all Aussie kids get access to three year old preschool?
 
All of the experts show that 90 per cent of a child's brain develops before they turn five. So we need to make sure that they're getting age appropriate, quality learning in their early years. I think that's a much better investment for the future of this country. 
 
STEFANOVIC: The problem is the Coalition are almost back in surplus, they are just better at managing the economy, aren’t they?
 
SHORTEN: No, not at all. Did you know Karl that since they have got into power they have doubled the national debt? And what we have also seen is that they've had deficit upon deficit. Now, of course, they're relying on some increased corporate tax take but the real issue here is that the national debt is now north of half a trillion dollars. That means effectively, every man, woman and child when the Coalition got in had about $9000 of national debt, now it's north of $20,000. The other thing - 
 
STEFANOVIC: When was the last time Labor had a surplus, in government?
 
SHORTEN: Oh back in the 80s mate, but neither government has managed to produce a surplus - the Coalition hasn't managed to produce a surplus since they've been in power this time around.
 
And when we talk about managing the economy how about this for a number: wages growth is the lowest it’s been on record just about. What we see is corporate profits are up but under Coalition governments, if you are very well off in this country you do really well. 
 
But if you're not, well you just wait for a wage rise. Do you know most Aussies say to me when I travel around everything is going up in Australia, except their wages.
 
STEFANOVIC: The state governments aren't happy again with the GST carve up, will you support the changes?
 
SHORTEN: We do think that Western Australia has had a bad deal in the past, but we've got to make sure that if we legislate to give a better deal to Western Australia, which is what Labor has called for, that we just make sure that no other state is worse off. I think it's very important that Mr Morrison doesn't rush this, what we've got to do is make sure Western Australia gets a proper deal but no other state should be worse off. It's possible to do, absolutely.  
 
STEFANOVIC: Okay, despite Labor being well in front, Scott Morrison is selling a better story at the moment isn't he? He's miles in front of you personally on personal approval ratings. Do you worry about that?
 
SHORTEN: Well I don't think this country is getting a better deal from the third Liberal Prime Minister in five years. I don't think they do have a clear plan except to respond to events. 
 
You and I Karl, and a whole lot of Australians are fed up with politics which is very short-term. What people want from both sides of politics is vision. What we are announcing today is about giving a better deal to the next generation. That's why I want to be Prime Minister, to give a better deal to the next generation of Australians.
 
STEFANOVIC: If the approval ratings keep going the way they are, you're not going to start looking over your shoulder are you? Albo is ravenous. 
 
SHORTEN: No listen, I've been very lucky with my team in the last five years. I'm on my third Liberal Prime Minister and I think that if you want to look at disunity you've got to look at the Government don't you. 
 
I mean the fact of the matter is, have they explained why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull yet?
 
STEFANOVIC: No.
 
STEFANOVIC: One final one for you, I was thinking about you at length the other day, not that I do a lot of that -
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, okay.
 
STEFANOVIC: - a mad republican you must be incredibly pumped about this royal visit?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I've got to say that I think we should have an Australian head of state but my family, my eight year old is driving me crazy to meet Meghan Markle - there's no question that the royals - that every little girl loves a princess. 
 
STEFANOVIC: She has got very good taste, good on you thanks for your time Bill.
 
SHORTEN: Cheers, see you mate.

INTERVIEWER: The Federal Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten is on his way to Gippsland for the memorial outside the Longford plant and he's with us now, good morning. 
 
SHORTEN: Good morning.
 
INTERVIEWER: What do you remember of that time?
 
SHORTEN: It was a big time. I remember, of course, that two men got killed and another two were badly burnt. I remember Victoria was without gas for 10 days and I remember that the company at the time tried to blame the workforce. And what eventually happened is the workforce was exonerated and they received bravery medals. 
 
So I've got lots of memories actually of the time.
 
INTERVIEWER: And you were in a position with the union at that stage, weren't you?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I was with the Australian Workers Union, I was the Victorian Secretary and I was involved in trying to protect the workforce from the unfair blame of the company and trying to make sense of what had happened. And I met some fabulous local workforce at Longford, some have passed, but some I hope to see today at Longford.
 
So, a lot has happened since then but they were some outstanding human beings. 

INTERVIEWER: And what made you want to come back to Gippsland, to take time out of your schedule and attend this memorial?
 
SHORTEN: Because I've never forgotten the men I met there and their families, never forgotten them. They taught me a lot about resilience. Imagine when one of the biggest companies in the world wants to blame you for a fatal explosion which caused also great economic upheaval. And imagine having to withstand the pressure of a company who was - you know - their total wealth would make them, I don't know, the 18th largest country in the world - it's a lot of pressure on these Gippsland fellows. That’ the other thing they did is they got on with rebuilding the Longford gas plant, they were fantastic.
 
They got it up and running really quickly. 
 
INTERVIEWER: So that's why you're in Gippsland today but I want to ask you about this education funding as well. We've just been talking about the extra $4.5 billion in extra funding for Catholic and independent schools under this announcement from Scott Morrison, do you support that decision?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the Government is playing catch up with Labor in terms of putting more money back into the Catholic schools system.
 
The real story here - and you know, they're on their third Prime Minister for goodness sakes and they think everyone's got amnesia - but very quickly, this is the story: Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull cut $17 billion from all schools; government and non-government. What Morrison has done because the Catholic schools have been quite successful campaigning and because Labor has already sorted the issues out with them, is that he's put money back in the Catholic and non-government schools. 
 
But you know they just can't help themselves. They're trying to do education on the cheap. There's still $14 billion that's got to be put back into government schools. I do not know why Scott Morrison is causing a fight between government and non-government schools. I mean the point about education is we want all our kids to get a quality education. 
 
So what he's done is he's done a patch up job to keep one group of people happy but he's ignored all the other government school kids. I think that's a terrible mistake. 

If you want to do education, don't treat it as a political problem to put a Band-Aid on, actually prioritise it and put all of the money that you've cut back into the system and don't discriminate against the government schools.
 
INTERVIEWER: Yeah I mean, in saying that, you'd support this extra $4.5 billion funding though, wouldn't you?

SHORTEN: We've already said that we would put money back into the Catholic and non-government system but Labor believes in education. So we will put money back into the government schools too.
I think the antics of the last month, where the Liberal Party still hasn't explained why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and they just don't get it. Everything is just, you know, patch it up, move on, nothing to see here. Even the Liberal Government in New South Wales - Scott Morrison's home state - has said they're not going have a bar of this education deal.

Do you know, it shouldn't matter where a kid goes to school, parents pay taxes and if they choose to send their kids to government schools, as well as, to you know, your local Catholic school, all parents see some of those taxes reinvested in the education of their children.

The Government does not have a satisfactory explanation why they're putting back, reversing the cuts to the non-government schools but neglecting public education in this country.

INTERVIEWER: We just had a chat with David Baker, the principal of Gippsland Grammar, and he was saying he gets fed up with this discussion whenever we're coming up to an election and that private schools like his are extremely important in educating kids in places like Gippsland. Do you support those comments?

SHORTEN: Sure. But I actually think Sale Secondary College is also important. For me, I am sector neutral. If you choose to send your kids to government schools, that's good. If you choose to send your kids to a non-government school, that's good too.

Labor is the party of education, that's why we are offering to fix up all of the cuts that the Liberals have made, not just the ones to the non-government schools. What is the answer to why the Government is reversing cuts to one sector of our schooling system and not the other?

INTERVIEWER: Do you feel like the Australian people though, have lost confidence in their politicians –

SHORTEN: – sure 

INTERVIEWER: – and whenever they listen to yourself speaking or the Prime Minister speaking, they just think this is all spin?

SHORTEN: Well no, fair's fair. I do think that people are very disillusioned, but you can't mark me down because we're willing to properly fund education and just dismiss it as spin. Facts have still got to matter. Do you know what, sometimes some people in the media - and I'm not saying you but others - have got to actually stretch themselves and ascertain the facts. You can't just say every politician is spinning.

We are fair dinkum. We are engaging in tax reform; we're not going to give tax concessions to the super wealthy in this country. That's why we can afford to invest in education.

I think it's more important that the children of the Longford workforce, whatever school they go to, get properly funded. I've spent a lot of time in Gippsland in my working life. I know that it's a great quality life. My mum was a school teacher down at Orbost in the 60s. Gippsland is part of what I know but I know that schools need to be properly funded, government as well as non-government.

INTERVIEWER: Look, thank you very much for your time this morning, I appreciate it.

SHORTEN: Yeah lovely to talk. And it's going to be great to see some people even though it's marking a tragic event.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, Opposition Leader.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, good morning. Welcome.
 
SHORTEN Good morning, Barrie.
 
INTERVIEWER: What is the answer to that? Why is it now suddenly critically important?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I think that there's been a lot of developments, hasn't there? This is not just Labor saying there's a cloud over the eligibility of a senior minister - it's now Malcolm Turnbull, it's now Julie Bishop. The Solicitor-General's advice that the Government relies upon, says that it thinks that it is the better position that Mr Dutton's Constitutionally eligible, but it doesn't give a 100 per cent guarantee and having learnt the hard way myself, you're better removing all ambiguity and submitting it to the High Court.
 
INTERVIEWER: But how much ambiguity? Christian Porter points out there now - that you've got the situation now where you need absolute certainty, otherwise you want to refer it to the High Court?
 
SHORTEN: Well, I think Mr Porter's problem is that the Prime Minister who he supported for the last three years say's there a problem and for the sake of certainty, you're best off referring it to the High Court. 
 
Julie Bishop has said that she think there needs to be greater clarity. The Solicitor General's opinion is not, dare I say it, a black and white matter. I look at the way that Malcolm Turnbull forced Barnaby Joyce to go to the High Court and I just think that now the Government's applying a different standard.
 
INTERVIEWER: Who forced Barnaby Joyce to the High Court? Malcolm Turnbull?
 
SHORTEN: Well, the Solicitor General's advice that they had, that broadly said that the better view that the Solicitor-General thought was that Mr Joyce was eligible, but they didn't give that categorical assurance and that's the same here. The Solicitor-General is saying that, listen, they think that Minister Dutton is okay, but I wouldn't want to be trying to get a bank loan based on the certainty of that advice of the Solicitor General.
 
INTERVIEWER: So, will you bring it on this week in the Parliament?
 
SHORTEN: What we want to do, and we think, without question, the preferred position will be to refer it off to the High Court - let's get resolution. I think that the Australian people hate the fact that the politicians can't guarantee if they're eligible to do their day job. But we need to have Government members support that position, so let's have a look at that and we have to, of course, wait until there is a majority to refer the matter.
 
INTERVIEWER: Why wouldn't you bring it on to a vote when Julie Bishop has virtually invited you to do so?
 
SHORTEN: Let's just see, and I think it's not just Julie Bishop, to be fair to Ms Bishop. She shouldn't have to carry the can for the whole of the Liberal Party as she's had to. I think there's other MPs. But we need to just see Government MPs perhaps ventilate their feelings a little more in the course of the week.
 
INTERVIEWER: So you're worried that they might be bluffing and in the end, they wouldn't support you?
 
SHORTEN: I think there's a lot more water to go under the bridge but the real issue here in terms of Australians and why it matters to the everyday voter, is that you have the Minister for Home Affairs, a very important person, making very important decisions, there shouldn't be any Constitutional cloud over his eligibility to make those decisions, and I think that the Government needs to just clear the issue up.
 
INTERVIEWER: The Royal Commission into Aged Care. Now, I presume, based on what you have said in the past that you will support the idea?
 
SHORTEN: I'd welcome an overdue look at the aged care sector in Australia.
 
I said that it was a national crisis some months ago. Of course, as you've shown earlier on today, as soon as I said it was a national crisis, the Government rushed out and accused me, rather wrongly, of causing fear-mongering. I wonder if the Minister for Aged Care will accuse his new boss of fear-mongering, like he accused me. 
But leave aside who has come up with the idea, the real story here is that many of our older Australians - quiet literally, many of our older Australians are genuinely worried about going into aged care. You talk to parents, you talk to kids - adults who have got older parents, the one thing that I think a lot of older Australians secretly dread is losing control over their own lives. And they are genuinely worried that when they go into aged care, that's exactly what happens. So I hope that this Royal Commission looks at not just individual homes and how they're treating people, but the fundamental, systemic problems. 
I mean, what we've seen under this current government is they've cut $2 billion, nearly, in aged care funding. Mr Morrison was the Treasurer who cut funding. You can't repair the system whilst you're cutting it at the same time.
 
INTERVIEWER: But is it about funding? What is it that seems to be at the core of this? What is the problem with aged care?
 
SHORTEN: I'll certainly be watching Four Corners and I thought one of your panellist's comments that maybe the Government was anticipating a pretty tough story, I'll be watching that.
 
But I think some of the problems - and I've been holding town hall meetings all over Australia and I hear it first hand from people - one, the staff don't get paid properly. Two, I think we need a discussion about enough ratios of qualified people in the aged care facilities. Are there enough nurses? Are there enough doctors? Do we have the local pharmacist involved enough in terms of what is happening in the administration of care? Three, you can't cut billions of dollars of the funding going to hostels and homes for people with high need, complex conditions, and expect a better result. So there are some of the issues.
 
And I think we also need to make sure that retirement villages get examined. I am hearing lots of stories about people feeling ripped off by the retirement villages. So this is a big issue, Labor will support a good examination but it has got to be everything - staff, training, funding, and making sure that people get the care that they deserve.
 
INTERVIEWER: It couldn't be wrapped up and then responded to between now and the May election, could it?
 
SHORTEN: I don't see how that's possible. We'll have to see what the Government is thinking and they need to consult on the terms of reference. 
 
The other thing to say here is that there's been 20 inquiries. I bet that there are people right now watching the show who have been calling for reforms, and we actually know a lot of what we need to do. A lot of good people have contributed what they think the solution is. So what we need to make sure of is this Royal Commission, and it shouldn't be rushed, shouldn't be used as an excuse not to carry out reforms that need to be done now. We know now that aged care workers aren't paid enough. We know now that there's not enough active inspection of facilities. We know now that there's problems with retirement villages. We know now already that the Government cut the dementia supplement. That was a payment made to nursing homes for people who are diagnosed living with dementia. Cutting dementia supplements? The Government was just mean when they did it. So we know some of the answers now. But certainly, I do think that there is a national crisis. I don't think that I'm fear-mongering and I'm pleased that the Government is moving in the same direction.
 
INTERVIEWER: On the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the TPP, you've raised concerns in the past about this, quite substantial concerns, in fact, and now you're on board. What happened?
 
SHORTEN: Well, you'd have to say that we're on board somewhat reluctantly. There are some positives in this arrangement, no doubt. And we think that there are some negatives. What we'll do is cooperate to see the positives implemented and we're going to change the negatives if and when we get elected. 
 
For example, one of the problems we see with it is just allowing no labour market testing to happen. What that means is that people can come in from these treaty countries, and even if the employer here hasn't demonstrated a shortage of labour, people can still come in and take jobs. I think that is a mistake.
 
INTERVIEWER: That's still the case, and you've signed up to it.
 
SHORTEN: We'll change that when we get into government because I don't agree with that.
 
INTERVIEWER: But can you? That would mean renegotiating the whole thing?
 
SHORTEN: No. Jacinda Ardern in New Zealand, the Labour Prime Minister there, went to a series of countries on provisions which a conservative government had signed up to, and executed letters with those countries and both countries agreed not to go ahead with that. That's our plan there. 
I also have to say that there are other things that we can do to look after the working conditions of Australians. We're going to put more money back into TAFE. I don't think that there should be people coming in from overseas taking up skilled labour vacancies for a day longer than it takes to train an Australian. I believe that some of our changes will help to take that away. 
 
But one thing that I do put the Government on notice: there's a discussion which the electricians have raised with me, that people could come here as electricians and not meet the adequate local safety standards, and I need the Government to clear that up, because we don't want untrained tradies coming in to Australia and not doing work sufficient to Australian standards.
 
INTERVIEWER: I don't think that the unions are satisfied that you can sort all of this out after the event. The Australian Manufacturing Union has described it as a disaster and a break with Labor policy.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah, I accept that some of the unions would rather that we handled it in a different way –
 
INTERVIEWER: Or not be in it at all - they just want out.
 
SHORTEN: Well, there are positives in this agreement too, for our farmers, for our steel industry, for our higher education sector.
 
This is not the agreement that Labor would have done - no way. But what I'm not going to do is just oppose everything, full stop. They're still the Government. They'll do what they think, we'll extract what value is in it. But if we form a government, we're going to clamp down on this lack of labour market testing, the lack of proper standards. But the way we fix better workplaces with better wages and conditions won't just be through a trade agreement, it will be through proper wages policy in this country, proper TAFE, proper apprenticeships, proper buy local and prioritising local jobs.
 
INTERVIEWER: Another policy, the energy policy, the NEG, the National Energy Guarantee, is certainly dead to the Government. But is it dead to you? Are you thinking about using the NEG as a basis for your policy and then perhaps adding your own targets?
 
SHORTEN: We'll have more to say about energy policy in the next couple of months but I think you're right. The Government did some work on the National Energy Guarantee and we are prepared to use that as part of our framework going forward. That's not our final position, I hasten to add, and we'll have consultation and discussion with my colleagues. But I think people are sick and tired of the climate change wars. The climate denialists, for all intensive purposes, Tony Abbott, have taken over the Liberal Party. They didn't want the Clean Energy Target. They didn't want an Emissions Trading Scheme. The real issue here is that we've now got a climate denialist party in power, and the only policy they can do, now they've rejected the National Energy Guarantee, is one that will drive up power prices and do nothing to encourage more renewables. 
 
So I'm happy to work with the sensible part of the Liberal Party, with industry, with environmentalists, and we'll come up with a framework which will look a lot like, I hope, parts of the National Energy Guarantee, and, of course, we want to see lower prices and more renewables.
 
INTERVIEWER: You did seem to accept all the way along that the NEG was a good framework?
 
SHORTEN: Yeah –
 
INTERVIEWER: And that's still your position? You can build with that?
 
SHORTEN: We think that there's something that we can work with there, yes. I mean part of the problem though, Barrie, and I think that we need to have this discussion, is that the market is dysfunctional in terms of energy prices. And one thing I'm certainly convinced of is that the rampant privatisation of our power generators and the system hasn't led to lower prices. It just led to a loss of jobs, higher prices and greater unreliability and a lack of investment.
 
INTERVIEWER: Over the weekend, your environment spokesman, Mark Butler, said of the Adani mine that he's against it. Are you with him on that?
 
SHORTEN: Well I think that is essentially Mark's judgement, that he doesn't think it is going to happen and he doesn't support it. I think a lot of people feel that way. Our policy is that we won't put a single taxpayer dollar into the project. There's a lot of scepticism if the project is ever going to happen.
 
INTERVIEWER: What do you think the prospects are of it going ahead if Labor was to be elected in the next election?
 
SHORTEN: First of all, there's what happens before an election. I don't know, Barrie, I think that a lot of people think that despite the press releases coming out of Adani, there's more hype than substance - and history would tend to indicate that. 
 
If and when we're elected, and that's a big if, of course, we have to get elected, I'll sit down with my Cabinet colleagues, we will work on the best science available. There will be no taxpayer money subsidising this coal project and we'll see from there.
 
INTERVIEWER: Now, there was another story in the papers this morning that we didn't get to but you've written to the Prime Minister asking him to support a National Integrity Commission, which is basically a commission to keep an eye on politically elected people, politicians -
 
SHORTEN: And the Commonwealth public service.
 
INTERVIEWER: And the public service. Now, you made a similar request to Malcolm Turnbull and he was, I think from memory, open-minded about it at the time?
 
SHORTEN: Well, far be it from me to judge the Turnbull legacy but I think that this is another opportunity that he missed. I do think that we need a national anti-corruption commission, so I give a tick to my colleagues in the Labor Party for pushing that.
 
The best way to create a National Integrity Commission is through bipartisan support. I tried, but didn't get very far with Mr Turnbull, so I have written to the new fellow, Mr Morrison, and said - let's work on this together. I think that Australians want to see us - their faith in politics is at an all-time low. We saw $444 million handed to a private foundation made up of ex-bankers and executives in large part. There's not enough transparency in some of the decisions, so I think that a national anti-corruption commission is at least one way that the political system can demonstrate to disillusioned voters that we're willing to be held to the same standards.
 
INTERVIEWER: But what sort of things are you looking at? What sort of things go on in everyday political life that you want to nail?
 
SHORTEN: Every other level of government has an anti-corruption commission, other states have. I think that there's a lot that we can learn from those lessons. I don't think that there's a whole lot of criminality - any criminality, if there was, I'd report it. But the point about it is that it's a gap in our integrity system, and I think a lot of Australians say - why is it that the Government, the Liberals, don't want to have an anti-corruption commission in Canberra?
 
INTERVIEWER: Now, it's been a big week for the "why" question. You've been asking the "why did you sack Malcolm Turnbull?" There is a why question for you, I think, given that you're so far ahead in the polls and yet Scott Morrison, in the latest Newspoll, leads you as preferred prime minister. Why?
 
SHORTEN: Well first of all, I haven't commented on the polls for the last five years. I think that - and today, it is even more important than ever that we talk about policy. I think that the Australian people want to see - what are the ideas that we're going to do to improve the lives of our fellow Australians? So I don't comment on the polls, haven't, be they good or bad. I think that there's probably the wisdom in that -
 
INTERVIEWER: Does it bother you when you see –
 
SHORTEN: I tell you what, the last Prime Minister or the last leader who worried about the polls, is probably watching this on iView from New York. I don't think it's done me a lot of harm not talking about the polls.
 
INTERVIEWER: Thank you for your time this morning.

SHORTEN: Cheers.

INTERVIEWER: The Opposition Leader Bill Shorten arrived in Perth yesterday for a two day visit, and he must be feeling pretty happy with the way things are going right now, and that was after the Liberal turmoil last week. Mr Shorten, good morning and welcome to ABC Radio Perth and WA. 

SHORTEN Good morning Paula. Good morning Peter. 

INTERVIEWER: Now I'm quoting some commentary that I heard yesterday but are you measuring up curtains for the Lodge at the moment?

SHORTEN: No. I just want to reassure Australians that despite the chaos and division that we saw last week in the Government and their inability to explain why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull, I want to reassure Australians that what we're working on is positive reasons to vote for Labor. 
We want to earn the respect of people for our stability, our steadiness, our plans for the future. We don't want to just assume that the negatives of the current government will bleed across into positive votes for us. We want to fight for every vote.

INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten you probably noticed that Western Australians care a lot about the GST and you're here talking about GST reform. What about committing to changing the GST formula the way the Liberals have?

SHORTEN: Well actually the Liberals haven't put in their final proposal. What I have said yesterday, and I've done it after consultation with Premier Mark McGowan who's been a very strong advocate for a better deal for Western Australia, as I've said the following things: 

That like the Liberals we will, and from 2019-2020 financial year ensure that Western Australia gets no less than 70 cents in every dollar that's paid. It's like a floor that doesn't stop it being above it, but that's the floor. And then again as the Government and ours are both proposing and 2024-25 we want to raise this floor to 75 cents, and we're proposing to legislate that within the first 100 days of an election.

Now the Government has come back and said "oh it’s all politics and you know, will they commit to a particular formula?"

We've said show us the detail. One thing's for sure this is my 40th visit to Western Australia as Opposition Leader, I think I've spent nearly three months here in the last five years. I'm fully conscious that Western Australia hasn't been getting a fair share.

My view of Australian Federation is that the way which we look after everyone isn't by beggaring someone else. But there's no doubt in my mind. So what we'll look at in the distribution formula is making sure that other states aren't disadvantaged, but we're going to put the floor in place because Western Australia hasn't been getting a fair deal.

INTERVIEWER: Okay, Mr Shorten we know the Liberals want to peg the GST distribution to New South Wales and Victoria though, so do you support that general idea?

SHORTEN:  I'm not going to give the Government a blank cheque. We need to see what their final distribution recommendation is to the States. The States are going to have to agree with it. But what I've undertaken to both Premier McGowan and to Western Australians, is that we're prepared to be on a unity ticket with the Government. We just want to make sure that other States including Tassie, South Australia and Queensland don't cop it in the neck. But our commitment on the floor is unequivocal and part of the reason how we can make sure that everyone gets something, gets a proper deal, a fair deal, is that we're not giving away big tax cuts to top income earners and we haven't been pursuing corporate tax cuts, and we won't pursue them if we form a government. So we have enough money in the Budget to make sure that the West gets its fair go.

INTERVIEWER: Now, understandably with everything that happened last week people really want some certainty right now. I'm sure you're hearing that. So WA, we want certainty on this as well. Can you commit to changing the GST formula?

SHORTEN: We need to see the final detail. Anyone who says that they can commit to something that they haven't seen is selling you something which isn't real. 
What we commit to is the floor, what we commit to is working with the Government. What we commit to is legislating the floor in our first 100 days. And listen I think essentially we probably will get to the same point on distribution.

I just want to see the final detail but we're not looking to find problems with it. Our only proviso is to make sure that the Government doesn't play any games on other states of Australia but there is no doubt in my mind the West hasn't been getting its fair deal. We'll work with the Government. This is what people want to hear out of politics. They want to say well, Bill you've been the Leader of the Opposition will you work with whoever the Liberals have currently there and I say yes. I'm interested in coming back to Western Australia, so we'll get this right.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten what does the floor need to be legislated, why isn't an intergovernmental agreement sufficient? That would be pretty hard to change.
 
SHORTEN: I think that putting in a black and white legislation just puts it beyond doubt. I mean it's not me, it's the Government has had three different Prime Ministers in the time I've been Opposition Leader. The next person along might say well that was that person and that's not me, so I'm not bound to it.
 
If you make it the law, then it's the floor.
 
INTERVIEWER: You're on ABC Radio Perth and WA and we're talking to Bill Shorten the Opposition Leader. You're looking around WA at the moment, you've been here a few times about how many seats do you think Labor could pick up in a federal election that you haven't currently got here in WA?
 
SHORTEN: I think we're competitive but we're not arrogant. When I come to Western Australia I don't look at Liberal Western Australians and Labor Western Australians or you know, Independent Western Australians - I just see Western Australians. 
 
So what I want to do to win the votes and I want as many votes as possible, I want to do that on the basis that people respect us. On the basis they think that - you know, this morning parents will have packed their kids off to school, I want to make sure that their schools that they're sending their kids to are well funded. 
 
There'll be people today right across the State both in the regions and in Perth who are on elective surgery waiting lists. We want to try and do what we can to reduce that. There'll be people last night who checked into emergency departments with severe episodic mental illness, but where will they go today? Where's the aftercare? We've got people waiting for aged care packages of support. 
 
For me, politics isn't about a particular title or a particular job, it's about what we do to improve the control that people have over their own lives. So if your family's okay and your health is okay, then I've found a lot of other things start falling into place. So that's how we're going to win votes by not thinking of ourselves but thinking about what we do to cut the rubbish out and just get on with the job.
 
INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, yesterday we heard from Julia Banks who is from your home State of Victoria. She made some allegations against Liberal MPs but she also mentioned Labor MPs in there as well. Have you investigated whether there's any substance to the claims that she made about people in your Party?
 
SHORTEN: I've tried to ring her to find out what she meant but I think to be fair to Labor her comments have come after the last week of Liberal infighting. I do think that anyone who is feeling bullied has a right to a safe workplace. The one thing to have adversarial politics where we contest the ideas of each side of politics but we've got to a world where it's the politics of destruction. I mean to be honest the Liberals boast about having a 'Kill Bill' strategy. So I do feel for her, she's a talented woman. We don't agree on policy but I've got to know her a little bit. If the Liberals can't hold women like that in their ranks they have a problem that's not being political it's just stating the obvious but I do think last week's taken a big toll within the Liberal Party. I do think that's what's triggered Julia stepping down and I think politics is the worse for it. All of us should be reminded to behave better. But I do think the Liberal Party, what we've seen with their division, they're not going to heal this quickly. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten, Julia Banks specifically mentioned both parties. Is Parliament a safe workplace for women?
 
SHORTEN:  I do think that there's too much bullying goes on and by that, I don't necessarily know what has happened to her and I don't have the facts but I have seen some of the Government rush to say oh it's all made up or that's just life. Sure, in adversarial politics you're going to disagree and things get said but I don't know what has gone on last week. I don't know who got heavied on what but clearly something has gone wrong here.
 
INTERVIEWER: Mr Shorten thanks for joining us. That's the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joining you on ABC Radio Perth and WA.

INTERVIEWER: Bill Shorten, good morning to you. 

SHORTEN Good morning Jon. 

INTERVIEWER: Does Scott Morrison have a majority? Can he guarantee to the Governor-General he has a majority on the floor of the Parliament when it resumes on the 10th of September?

SHORTEN: Well I don't know the answer to that, but I'm not sure that Mr Morrison does. With Mr Turnbull announcing that he'll step down, he won't be back in Parliament, which means that the Government only has 75 MPs out of 150 and one of those is the Speaker, so that means they have 74. So we are in the zone of minority government. 

INTERVIEWER: We've been there before. 

SHORTEN: Yes, but it is a development. Also there's a Nationals Member of Parliament, perhaps a quiet achiever is what you would call him, Mr Hogan up in Page, and he's said he's going to sit on the crossbench as well. 

INTERVIEWER: 73.

SHORTEN: Yes. So I think the Government doesn't want to have an election, but on the other hand I think the people of  Australia are feeling quite left out of all the decisions that have been happening recently.

I mean, wherever I go, Jon, wherever I go, shops or just talking to people, people say that they didn't choose Scott Morrison and so the last thing this nation needs is the axe of a minority government hanging over the head of the nation.

INTERVIEWER: Have you spoken to or approached the Governor-General to discuss the constitutional impasse that may be on the horizon?

SHORTEN: No. I've written to Mr Morrison - this is all pretty fast moving as you’d appreciate -  what I have written to Mr Morrison is a letter where I congratulate him, but I've also read media reports that they are rushing to appoint a new Governor-General, although the existing Governor-General's term doesn't finish until the end of March next year. 
I think this is a government who is going to be tempted to do things on the on the run. I mean - 

INTERVIEWER: Well they're entitled to.

SHORTEN: Well, but are they Jon when you think about the issue that Australians haven't voted for Scott Morrison. In fact, I think Mr Morrison owes the Australian people a detailed explanation of why last week happened. 
Now, I didn't see eye to eye with Mr Turnbull, that's a matter of record, we exchanged harsh words but I do think he's being treated, he and his Deputy Liberal Leader Julie Bishop, have been treated poorly by their own party and people are saying why did this all happen?

INTERVIEWER: Your party did the same thing, I remind you, not that many years ago.

SHORTEN: Oh no you're right. It was five years ago and eight years ago and we've learned our lesson though. 
First of all, the Party has given me support for the last five years. We are stable, we're steady and we also changed the rules in our party to stop the sort of ambushes we've seen when Mr Turnbull got rid of Mr Abbott, and now Mr Dutton tried to get rid of Mr Turnbull, and Mr Morrison came up the middle.

Australia deserves better from its politicians than what they are currently getting from the Government. 

INTERVIEWER: Tony Abbott says the era of assassination is over?

SHORTEN:  What does that mean, he's not going to assassinate someone? I mean, sorry, but if you want to change the era I think the Liberals need to do some time in opposition to understand how fundamentally people don't like this. 

I mean, 40 or 50 Liberal MPs have picked the Prime Minister of Australia. The people of Australia should have a say. I mean, what is really confusing about what's happened last week and what's probably got people legitimately angry, is the Government hasn't answered one question: why?
I mean last week the Prime Minister was Malcolm Turnbull in Parliament. Next week it's Scott Morrison and there hasn't been an explanation of why.

Why did we go through all of this? Why is Australia called the coup capital of the world of Western democracies? 
I mean, was this a big debate about policy or was it just that people didn't like Malcolm Turnbull in his own party? Or they were ambitious for themselves? 

INTERVIEWER: Do you have a problem if Julie Bishop is nominated and installed as the next Governor-General even before the term of the current one expires? 

SHORTEN: Well there's two issues there. One is the person and the other is the office. I'll go to the second issue of appointment of Governor-General. This process should be methodical, it should be done with consultation. 

INTERVIEWER: Do you want to have a say in who the next Governor-General is?

SHORTEN:  Absolutely we do, and I certainly think the decision -  because it should be for the new government whoever they are, Liberal or Labor 

INTERVIEWER: You're effectively saying Scott Morrison is a caretaker Prime Minister then if you do that.

SHORTEN: No, I'm just saying that he can make decisions which affect them now, but appointing -  this is the Head of State of Australia. 

INTERVIEWER: Well Scott Morrison is the Prime Minister. It's within his authority to choose the next Governor-General.

SHORTEN: I think it would, be if they rush this, this will be an act of desperation, and what they want to do is try and assert decisions for which they don't have any responsibility after the next election if they are unsuccessful. 
There's nothing wrong, because we all know we're going to have an election sometime between now and February/March of next year, there's nothing wrong with extending Peter Cosgrove's term for another six months. So we get the election out of the way and the new government of the day has its appropriate say. And that could be Liberal. 

INTERVIEWER: If Scott Morrison is the Prime Minister after the election you're saying it's only fair then he obviously gets to appoint -

SHORTEN: Sure.

INTERVIEWER:  Is that because you don't want Julie Bishop as Governor-General?

SHORTEN: No that was the other part of your question, I said come back to it. So I think Julie Bishop's, for a Liberal, done a good job in foreign affairs. I think she presented Australia's image on the global stage of some panache. 
I have a hesitation about just appointing serving politicians to the position of Governor-General straight away. It's not without precedent, but I don't want to make this about Julie Bishop. I want to make this about the proper process. Get the process right. 

This is a government who was happy to throw Tony Abbott overboard to put in Malcolm Turnbull, then they're happy to throw Malcolm Turnbull overboard to put Scott Morrison or Peter Dutton or someone in.
 
I just think this is a government who needs to get its priorities right. The issue is what's going to change in policy between this Government led by this Prime Minister and the previous government which had all of the same people in this Government in it except for Malcolm and Julie? What's going to change?
 
INTERVIEWER: No all of them either way. Does the Labor Party run dead in Wentworth or do you run a serious campaign?
 
SHORTEN: I think Wentworth is a hard seat for Labor to win. It's a margin of nearly 18 per cent. But we're still considering our options there.
 
INTERVIEWER: And apart from anything else, if you're going to look at constitutional change, if you're going to look at arrangements in the Parliament, what about making proper constitutional change? From time to time ideas get floated about everything from the Republic to a Makarrata. But what about fixed four year terms? They're working in state politics around the country.

SHORTEN: Well, changing the Constitution is very difficult. And in fact, this period of Australian history, unlike tenure of Prime Ministers, has been the longest period in which our Constitution hasn't been updated.
 
My priorities would be of course to look at having an Australian Head of State. It would also be to ensure that our First Australians are included in the Constitution. 
 
Four year terms, though, does make sense. With four year terms, I'd need to get the cooperation of the opposition of the day. I can't see these guys running it if they're the Government, but people are over these sort of revolving door governments. People just say, just get on and do your day job. So I think four year terms does make sense. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Do you deal with the dual citizenship issue that's caused so much havoc in the last 12 months as well?
 
SHORTEN: Well, it has caused havoc and some can argue the rule is outmoded but it wouldn't be my immediate priority. I think politicians just need to get their house in order and get their eligibility sorted out. It wouldn't be my number one priority. 
 
Let's go to the heart of the matter here and a number of questions, Jon, have gone towards the current Government, election, change of government. We're determined to win the next election but we want to do it based on the merit of our case. We want to earn the respect of the Australian people. I don't want to just see us fight an election based on their negatives. I don't automatically assume, and I'm not complacent, that the Government's negatives of instability and being with the wrong policies, automatically translates into a positive vote for us. We've got to work hard for that. 
 
INTERVIEWER: How convincingly does Bill Shorten claim the moral high ground on anything?
 
SHORTEN: We've got the policies which are in the interests of working and middle Australia. To people listening to this show now who are just fed up with politics, I get that. That's why I want to reverse the five years of cuts to TAFE and apprenticeships, for example. It's why I would like to see a better deal on child care and universal education for our young ones; three and four year olds. It's why we'd like to see first home buyers in the cities get a fighting chance and not have to compete against taxpayer funded concessions going to investors.

INTERVIEWER: Let's get to one of the other big announcements this morning. The Victorian Labor Government, campaigning for the November election, have announced today that they're going to commit $300 million to an underground outer urban rail loop. So this is an outer ring-rail, underground the whole way, which goes - well, you can imagine. It goes from Cheltenham across to Monash, Box Hill, across to Doncaster, to Heidelberg, Bundoora, to Latrobe, out that way and then across from there to Broadmeadows, to Sunshine, to Werribee - $300 million dollars. First of all, would a Federal Labor government contribute to it?
 
SHORTEN: Well, we'd have to see the numbers and decide if we wanted to do that. But in light of this announcement, let me just say, I think Dan Andrews is on the right track -
 
INTERVIEWER: You are going to say that but it's about congestion busting -
 
SHORTEN: No, no. Let's -
 
INTERVIEWER: For increasingly crowded cities. Melbourne hit 5 million population yesterday.

SHORTEN: Yes 
 
INTERVIEWER: And congestion is directly tied to immigration which was one of the drivers for the Liberal Party's unrest last week.

SHORTEN: Well first of all, I understand the frustration of Australians about crowded infrastructure, and our immigration should be what's in the national interest but part of that debate has to be fixing up our infrastructure.
 
But going back to where we started with the proposal from Victorian Labor about a railway - an underground railway, a sort of circle railway around Melbourne. This has been the holy grail of public transport. Did you know back in 1890, 1890 we had a ring railway in Melbourne. I should know because where I grew up in Murrumbeena-Oakleigh, there was still clear land which had actually been a working railway. But that was between 1890 in 1893 and what happened then, Melbourne was in boom then it went into bust and the railway closed. I always thought that was one of the great missed opportunities in history because this is 130 years later and we're debating it –
 
INTERVIEWER: Would you - 
 
SHORTEN: I like the principle, that's my answer. I think the principle of it.
 
INTERVIEWER: But this is about people's concerns as cities become increasingly congested, people's response is not to blame politicians for the failure to deal with infrastructure but instead to turn around and say let's cut immigration. Does Bill Shorten want to cut immigration?
 
SHORTEN: Listen, our immigration is one issue but let's talk about the failure of politics. The reason why I went back in detail to the history of an outer ring railway in Melbourne is we've been debating this for 130 years - that's the failure of politics. And so when Dan has a good idea, of course you've got to study the numbers, you know, you're not going to get too excited yet but I think we've got to applaud vision. 
 
What I see when I travel around, not just Victoria but Australia, is people want vision. The job of government is to lift the eyes of the nation up to be a better Australia. 
 
The problem with what we see with Quentin Tarantino writing the scripts for the Liberal Party at the moment with this sort of, civil war and revenge and more civil war and revenge, is that every time this happens we're not dealing with the big questions. 

Australians are sick and tired of the fact that their politicians can't agree on climate change and energy. They're sick and tired we can't build infrastructure for a generation and instead, it just comes down to sniping and counter-sniping.
 
INTERVIEWER: So on immigration, simple yes or no answer, do you want to change the way we do immigration? Do you want to reduce the number of people who get permission to move to Australia?
 
SHORTEN: It's not a simple yes or no issue. If we can take people in based upon our infrastructure, based upon the moving to the regions that's a plus.
 
INTERVIEWER: So you agree with Alan Tudge, the newly sworn-in Minister, who says let's try and get migrants to go to the regions rather than Sydney and Melbourne.
 
SHORTEN: Yeah I think that there is - and it's not just the regions. You know, South Australia, there are plenty of places who would like to take some migrants. Immigration has been good for Australia but there's no point in bringing in masses and masses of people if our infrastructure isn't keeping pace. So I guess what I'm saying is you can't just look at one part of it. We're an immigrant nation and immigration has been good.
 
Jon your family, my family, pretty much anyone other than a first Australian came from somewhere else. But having said that we've got to make sure that we're not you know just being ignorant of what happens if we're overcrowding our cities so that's why you've got to deal with the frustration people have on infrastructure.
 
INTERVIEWER: All right, the Financial Review front page says Morrison sticks to Paris, the Morrison Government will resist internal pressure to walk away from the Paris climate change target. 
 
SHORTEN: Good, that's good. There you go. 
 
INTERVIEWER: So there might even be the prospect that the Labor Party and Scott Morrison would work together to solve one of the great riddles of Australian politics?
 
SHORTEN: We're up for that. I mean people are sick of just the negativity. Labor's record though is that when Mr Turnbull was supporting an emissions trading scheme that's one way of dealing with energy prices, we said yeah we think that's okay, but he got rolled by his party. 
 
Then he proposed what they call an emissions intensity scheme and without getting into the ins and outs, we thought that seemed like a good framework. Then the Government backed away from that. Then they proposed a clean energy target, supported by the Chief Scientist, we said we're prepared to sit down and look at that. Then the Government walked away from that. 
 
My fear with dealing with the Government is that there's such an obsession with hating Labor and partisan politics in parts of the hard line right and such a suspicion of renewable energy that whatever Mr Morrison says, he can't deliver his party. Energy policy is taken down any number of conservative leaders and it's been a tricky debate on all sides on all sides of politics. 
 
I just want to say to Australians who are listening to the show, I do support seeing more renewable energy in our energy mix. That doesn't mean we won't be using coal fired power but I do believe renewable energy is the technology of the future. And with the developments in battery storage and pumped hydro, I don't know why we're still arguing about it at all.
 
INTERVIEWER:  28th of August, Adani, yes or no? On the 28th of August because it seems your position has shifted from time to time on Adani.
 
SHORTEN: No the deal has to stack up on its own merits. I do not support putting a single dollar of taxpayer money into this project. They've missed plenty of deadlines. 
 
What I'm going to do for Queenslanders and Central Queenslanders is focus on projects which are going to deliver real jobs. That's why we're proposing to upgrade the infrastructure of Townsville Port for example, or ring roads in Mackay or port access roads in Gladstone, real jobs. 
 
Also what we want to do is improve essential services in Queensland we've just said we're going to properly upgrade the emergency department for example at the Emerald Hospital in Central Queensland. I'm not going to start worrying about private sector projects which may never materialise. I'm going to focus on what I can do for the future.
 
INTERVIEWER: Yesterday a boatload of Vietnamese people arrived up at the Daintree River in far north Queensland, is that a failure of Australia to secure its borders?
 
SHORTEN: Well the Government sets great store on these matters. It is important we have secure borders but the irony of a boat arriving whilst the former Immigration Minister was competing against the current Home Affairs Minister is not lost on anyone I think. 
 
INTERVIEWER: So do we need to –
 
SHORTEN: These guys have got to stop focusing on themselves and do their day job. Now I'm sure that will lead to angry comments from the right wing of the Liberal Party but, if they think that what they've done in the last week has made Australia a better place they're sadly mistaken.
 
INTERVIEWER: Do we need to upgrade Border Force because of this incident?

SHORTEN: Well we've got to find out why it happened and what happened. I'm not going to leap to any conclusions.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright. I don't want to make you late for your next appointment and we've gone well over time already. Just finally, do you get regular text messages from Alan Jones or Ray Hadley or the Sky News after dark team telling you what to do?
 
SHORTEN: No, that doesn't mean that people never talk to me but listen I think that what we've got to do is - the media plays an important role, people are entitled to their opinions.
 
INTERVIEWER: Malcolm Turnbull called some of the people in the media partisan and thought that they stepped across the mark. Do you think that, do you agree?
 
SHORTEN: I can understand why Malcolm might say that but I have to say when you're Labor and you deal with some of the critique in the media you don't let it distract you from what's important.

INTERVIEWER: Do you agree with Kevin Rudd's assessment that Rupert Murdoch's a cancerous influence in Australian politics?
 
SHORTEN: That's Kevin's opinion. What I'm going to do is -
 
INTERVIEWER: Did he go too far?
 
SHORTEN: Who, Rupert Murdoch or Kevin Rudd?
 
INTERVIEWER: Kevin Rudd.
 
SHORTEN: No, I'm not going to criticise Kevin there, I think he's entitled to his opinion, he's earned it the hard way and I think also, in answering that question about Mr Rudd that's the difference between Labor and Liberal. I acknowledge what Kevin and Julia have done, they did some good things. We've learned the lessons of instability. People haven't  heard a lot from me in the last week because frankly, people can work out for themselves what's gone wrong in the last week and a half. But I just want to reassure listeners we're not complacent.  We don't assume that the negatives of the Government become our positives but instead we want to earn their respect and that's what we're doing.
 
INTERVIEWER: Alright, we'll wait and see exactly how the cookie crumbles, how the cards are played in the next week or two. Either way we're heading to an election and I suspect that the election campaign is pretty much kicked off with Mr Morison's visit to drought affected areas of Queensland yesterday, we'll see where we get to. 
 
SHORTEN: Well that's good he went there, I'm not going to complain about that, that's good he went there. Chloe and I went up to Western Queensland to have a look, I mean the drought has been there for years, it sort of finally got onto the national agenda. I think drought policies should be something which isn't partisan. I think most people recognise farmers do it hard and in these times that we've got to be there for them. So that's good he went there.

INTERVIEWER: Thank you for your time this morning. 
 
SHORTEN: Thank you Jon.