QUESTION: Now, you’re pledging to spend a lot of money through this campaign. This morning, $4 billion. This time on childcare over four years. Can you tell us who benefits?
ANSWER: And in that spirit of congratulations I'll just acknowledge Bec White, Tasmanian Labor leader. She certainly convinced us of the importance of investing in Tasmanian tourism. I'm not sure her counterpart has had the same success today in convincing the current Prime Minister to back in Tassie like we are.


QUESTION: Why won't child care providers just whack up their fees?
ANSWER: Well first of all I think it's long overdue for our First Australians to be in the nation's birth certificate, the Constitution. I think that we've left it too long. Now, what we will do is listen to the Uluru Statement from the Heart and we will argue the case for a voice. It will be a fully formed proposition. As for scare campaigns, we've already seen some in the right wing, in the extreme right wing already start to complain about including First Australians in the Constitution. We're up for the argument. In terms of an Australian head of state, yes Australia should have an Australian head of state. But we have said that what we want to have is the referendum on the voice first of all.


QUESTION: More money going to wages for childcare workers. Isn't that a reason for whacking up their fees?
ANSWER: We've actually set quite a lot aside and without taking too long on this interview I congratulate the work of Joel Fitzgibbon. We'll have a look at what the government said today and if it makes sense we'll do it. Because we don't approach this sort of negativity of the Government where as soon as one side of politics has an idea the other side has got to get out a big stick and whack it. So we'll have a look at that. But in addition, we've already offered $100 million for drought relief. We've also said that when it comes to central Queensland, that we will invest in the Rookwood weir which is going to open up 2,000 agricultural jobs. In Tasmania as well, I was down here a little while ago and we said that we would do tranche 3 of the irrigation projects, $100 million, which will assist to open up new land and provide greater productivity for farmers. So we're up for helping. And also, just for dairy farmers who have been doing it hard, we want to set a floor price for milk, which will be great assistance for them when they're dealing with the processes.


QUESTION: If you put in price controls how can their wages go up?
ANSWER: Well, Penny Wong dealt with this question comprehensively yesterday. I'm happy to go to the key points she said. If it wasn't because of a work-shy and lazy conservative government these laws may well have already been passed. But as you know, what we've got is a government in Canberra who has organised Parliament to sit for 10 days in eight months so no wonder we get didn't get to it. In terms of the actual security law what normally happens is that a parliamentary committee looks at the laws and we've got a unanimous position, both Labor and the others, so there's no reason why we couldn't do it in the first week back. But let's go back to the reason why we don't have it. The Morrison government cancelled Parliament so many times, they didn't want to sit, they're work-shy. So if Mr Morrison is looking to blame someone for a failure of national security, he should buy a mirror because that's the face he should blame.


QUESTION: Isn’t the problem though that you’re trying to give something to everyone, and everyone can’t benefit. In the end someone has to pay for this and in this case it will be those childcare providers who will get less money?
ANSWER: Well, let's go to the heart of the matter. I think it’s wrong that we don't have our First Australians in our Constitution. I guess you’d probably agree with me. Isn't it time in Australia that after 120 years that we actually said that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders should be in our Constitution? So I think it's not so much the difficulty of the debate but why don't we put just some of our Australians and give them the same recognition that all other Australians have. In terms of the head of state business, we’ve said we'd have a plebiscite not a full referendum in our first term. But we will advance on recognition of our First Australians. But that's not all that we're going to do. We want to close the gap. Your skin colour in this country should not be the reason why you do better or worse. So I think it's not a question of symbolic recognition or practical work, it’s about doing all of it. We'll work with people and this goes to the broader issues in these elections. The Morrison government, by its desperate deals with extreme right wing parties, is promising us if they get elected, a return to the chaos, a return to the cuts of the last six years. I mean, what we see is it won't just be Constitutional recognition of our First Australians which becomes endangered. It will be the whole business of government. Imagine what we won't get done in this country under a Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government. This is a government who is, you know, there's an old saying and I think that Mr Morrison is going to learn the truth of this in this election campaign, that if you lie down with dogs, you’re going to get up with fleas.


QUESTION: Let's go to that. How much are you raising in taxes over the next decade. The Government says $387 billion. What's your figure?
ANSWER: First of all, whether or not there were conversations, I would not sign off on any deal with Mr Palmer until he resolves the issue of the tens of millions of dollars that he owes taxpayers and workers. Now I’m not going to be like Mr Morrison who sort of very coyly pretends he doesn't know what’s going on in the administrative wing of his party. A deal like that, the leader’s got to be aware of. And I think that Mr Morrison’s got to come clean on what he’s promised Mr Palmer. Are we really to believe that when you do a deal with Mr Palmer he just gives you something for free? That is not that gentleman's track record. That is not that gentleman’s track record. So if there have been conversations to find out what Mr Palmer is up to, well that is as it is. But no deals from Labor. Because, and I think it's a legitimate question which you should be asking Mr Morrison, what arrangements has he made to get from Mr Palmer the hundreds of millions of dollars that he owes the Commonwealth and owes the debtors? How is it that this bloke, this Mr Morrison who’s always up on the high ground, always on his soap box, you know, parading his morality, yet you know, when it comes to doing a deal with Mr Palmer, he puts all of that aside, gets to the bottom of the barrel. What is Mr Morrison doing as the prime minister, doing a deal with Mr Palmer, when Mr Palmer owes his workers and owes taxpayers tens of millions of dollars? I’d like to get Anthony’s take on this, because he has done negotiations, not on the preferences, but with some of these crazy crossbenchers who the government keeps trying to desperately prop up.


QUESTION: You should know some of this now though, what you are raising in negative gearing and capital gains tax, what you’re doing in franking credits, so could you give us a figure over if not the next 10 years, over the next four years as to what you expect to raise.
ANSWER: First of all the election is not over. And what we're warning Australians is you have now seen, Mr Morrison has shown his hand. A vote for Scott Morrison is a vote for Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. What we now see is the prospect, if they are successful, of the most extreme right-wing government in Australia's history. We see the prospect of the most chaotic, risky government in Australia's history. Does anyone really believe that when you sit down with One Nation or you sit down with Palmer, that they're just giving preferences, One Nation and Palmer, to the Liberal Party and the LNP out of the goodness of their heart? That somehow it's an act of charity? Of course it's not. And the question you have got to ask the government, is what promises have been made. Do we have to water down our gun laws? Do we have to forgive Clive Palmer's debt which he owes the taxpayers and the workers? What is the deal. I mean old Morrison here, he's a very sneaky operator. I mean you could ask Malcolm Turnbull that. But he is a sneaky operator. In Melbourne and in Sydney and in Hobart and Launceston he says Oh no, we don't like One Nation, we'll put them below Labor. But up in Queensland where it really matters, he's given a sly nudge and a wink to his mate the Deputy Prime Minister, the Nationals, and to his party in Queensland you can do whatever deal you want. Well that's not on. The real issue here is do Australians want the prospect of the next three years of cuts, chaos, desperate behaviour by the Morrison-Palmer-Hanson government.


QUESTION: I understand that, but some of this stuff would be well known to you by now because these are policies you have been working on for six years so can you give us a figure on what you intend to raise by way of cutting tax concessions and raising taxes over the next 10 years?
ANSWER: First of all, yesterday Channel Two said what about us, and Channel Nine said what about us, and you complained about Channel Seven had an interview and Sky. So I thought the neatest and cleanest solution was to have you all in the same room at the National Press Club. We're happy to do it at lunch time. The good news is they have invented i-view. They can play it in the evening if you want to. We are happy to debate. But the other point is if we are going to talk about debates how have you gone finding Melissa Price? There should be a search party sent out to check on her whereabouts. Because we haven't had a debate on the environment or climate change between their ministers. And have they got the Minister for Industrial Relations out of witness protection? Where's the wages policy debate? And apparently Dan Tehan won't do one debate with Tanya Plibersek.


QUESTION: OK, if you won't or can't give us a figure on what you are raising in taxes, well can you tell people today whose taxes are going to rise in order to pay for these programs?
ANSWER: [inaudible]


QUESTION: So you’re saying it’s a big transfer of wealth from people’s pockets into government’s pocket. Why would you spend it any better than they will?
ANSWER: Why is it that Liberals whenever they see a new idea, a good idea, find an excuse not to do it? Let's talk about it. When the Liberals say that Tasmania shouldn't get some AFL funding, they need to explain why they are running around on mainland Australia providing AFL funding for the Swans, providing AFL funding for Collingwood. This is a government, a Liberal government nationally who wants to treat Tassie as second class. But let's go to some of the issues which we think are in touch. Jobs are an in touch issue. This will generate jobs. But what I also think is an in touch issue where the Liberals are nowhere within any close range of us is health funding. Did you know that we have already announced $100 million-plus of specific health projects for Tasmania. Because we don't think that Tasmanians because they live in Tasmania should have longer waiting lists than the mainland. Because we think that in Tasmania if you've got a diagnosis of cancer, you should be able to access metastatic cancer nurses just like they can elsewhere. Prostate nurses just like they can elsewhere. And when you look at what we are doing on health, that's just specific projects. Did you know because of our $2.8 billion hospital fund, we're going to see greater investment and reverse the cuts to Tasmanian hospitals that have occurred? Did you know because of our $2.3 billion plan to turbocharge Medicare, to help practically remove a lot of the out of pocket costs for cancer treatment, that is going to be of massive benefit to Tasmanians. And of course, let's not forget Labor's commitment to restore and start increasing the patient rebate when you go and see the GP. When you look at it, when it comes from tourism and jobs, when it comes to providing Tasmania some equal status in grassroots footy as they do on the mainland, or indeed to a fundamental issue like health, Labor has got all points over the Liberals. Maybe what the Tasmanian Liberals should do is rather than being a cheer squad for cuts and chaos to Tasmania from Canberra, maybe they should take a leaf out of Bec White's book and start fighting for Tasmania. Thank you, catch you soon.


QUESTION: Isn’t it a matter of priorities that you also then let people know as soon as possible where this money is coming from, because you are actually arguing for very big change in Australia and people have the right to have enough time to know where that money is coming from and where it is going to.
ANSWER: In my experience, people in the arts community throughout Australia are always pleased when the arts gets a lift anywhere. So, I don't think that people do begrudge MONA. That has been a private investment which has never relied on any federal support. Our investment we are providing Tasmanian tourism is $120 million. $50 million of that will be to MONA for public spaces, amphitheatres and the like. Tasmania has got a world class arts and tourism story to tell and we want to make sure that flagship ventures like MONA can be used to attract people to Tassie. When people come to Tasmania they don't just go to the south. Labor will certainly work with the local arts community to further develop projects in the north and the north west.


QUESTION: It's a big change and it's a big risk. Why should people trust you with that change?
ANSWER: We've provided some funding in our policies for Hobart airport. What we're doing in terms of providing greater support for infrastructure in Tassie though is quite extensive. From the Bass Highway through to the bridge through to a range of different projects. I don't have any specific knowledge of an approach about an aerobridge but again we are in a position to talk to Tasmania about infrastructure because we have made the serious economic reform decisions. We are not going to give money to multinationals. We would rather see Tasmanians receive their fair share. And if I might make the point, not about aerobridges but about health,  Labor's really proud of the fact that of all the things we are doing in Tasmania we think the fact that we are providing over $100 million specifically for health projects in Tasmania is exactly what Tasmanians are looking for. You shouldn't have to wait longer in Tasmania for elective surgery than you do in parts of the mainland. That's why we are very pleased with our $30 million to help blitz waiting lists in Tasmania. When you add that on to the $15 million mental health hub we are doing in Launceston, when you look at the $4.5 million we are doing for Tazreach to supply services in North Western Tasmania. Add that on top of the fact that Tasmania has had $35 million cut from its hospitals, including local hospitals here in Launceston. We are going to put all of that money back. Add that to the fact that we are going to tackle the out of pocket costs of people seeing the GPs. Add to that our $2.8 billion national hospital fund which will see Tasmanian hospitals receive greater support and add to that our $2.3 billion support to help tackle the out of pocket costs for cancer patients. Tasmanians, the best health offering for them comes from an elected Labor government in Canberra.


QUESTION: Let's assume people weren't focused though, for example when you get asked through the course...
ANSWER: There is no doubt that oral hygiene is an important part of a person's health. It was Labor who pioneered the child dental benefit services. I think that when you look at our health offerings though Labor has got the best offerings of the mainstream parties, indeed of the parties. The reality is we were down here in fact just a couple of days after Parliament rose, Ross and I and Catherine King announcing greater support for people going through the fight of their lives with cancer. So when you look at our hospital fund, when you look at the fact we are reversing cuts that this government has done to hospitals, when you look at our investment we are going to make in cancer treatment and helping with the out of pockets there. And of course our announcement today for the Royal Flying Doctor Service, Labor really is the party you can trust when it comes to the health of Tasmanians.


QUESTION: But when you were asked during the course of the campaign are you lifting taxes on super you should say yes, shouldn't you?
ANSWER: We will have a look at what everyone has to say. But I want to make it clear that if we form a government we will be a Labor government not an anything else government. Thank you everybody.


QUESTION: But you were asked about whether or not workers on over $180,000 are going to pay more tax, that's true too isn't it?
ANSWER: Good morning Edwina.


QUESTION: Sorry I will stop you there because you are not. If you are earning more than $180,000 a year, you are going to lift people's taxes, aren't you?
ANSWER: The subsidy will be for parents. If your household income is up to $68,000 we will provide a 100 per cent subsidy up to the capped amount of $11.77 an hour, so 100 per cent. If your household income is between $68,000 and $100,000, the subsidy is going to rise to 85 per cent of what you pay. And then between $100,000 and $174,000 the subsidy will be somewhere between 85 per cent down to 60 per cent. What this practically means is that for the first time after six long years of Liberal government where child care prices have gone up 24 per cent, where we hear stories of mums basically having to contribute most of their wage to their child care, this is a game-changer to help cost of living for nearly a million families, and it’s just going to make one of the biggest pressures on the family budget will be less.  In a real term, in a dollar term per year Edwina, it’s somewhere between $1,500 and $2,000 every year which families will have which won't be going on child care costs. That’s a real help to the family budget.


QUESTION: A couple of other questions, were you aware of anyone at all who is acting on Labor's behalf who was talking about preference deals with Clive Palmer? Were you aware of anyone in the Labor Party or in the union movement that was talking on your behalf?
ANSWER: Well we want the subsidy to go to the parents and what we're going to say to child care operators though is that we don't want them ramping up the prices. I think this is important point to make. We get that if you provide greater support for parents, there might be some child care operators who miraculously increase the fees by the subsidy which we are providing. So we're going to ask the ACCC to monitor prices. And what’s more is that if we see that there is some rent-taking, profit-taking by the operators, well then what we're going to do is we're going to contemplate price controls. So in other words, before operators can increase fees, they’ve got to get the approval of the government. So we want to make sure that the money gets to the pockets of the families.


QUESTION: Not committing you to but starting conversations about the possibility of a preference deal.
ANSWER: Up to $2000, yeah.


QUESTION: Did anyone...
ANSWER: We can afford to do this because we are making the tough economic decisions. We want multinationals to pay more tax. We are winding back the money that we give and negative gearing to property investors. It is a very straightforward proposition. It is about a choice. Do we want to be a country who gives taxpayer subsidy to someone to buy their sixth investment property, or do we want to help everyday Aussie families, a million of them, with the cost of child care. My view is that investing in child care is a better investment than giving a tax reward to someone who is buying their, you know multiple investment properties. So that is how we pay for it.


QUESTION: Absolutely. That's understood. But did anyone with your knowledge go and approach Clive Palmer? Did you know they were making those approaches?
ANSWER: Well under Scott Morrison, immigration has gone up, not down. I mean, this is politics. It is not about migration. Did you know Edwina that in Australia this year alone under the Liberals, there are 1.6 million people from overseas with visas which allow them to work in Australia, 1.6 million. So, Mr Morrison if he was fair dinkum would be talking about that and how we train Australians to do the jobs, rather than rely on 1.6 million people from overseas who have got visas which give them work rights. This is about politics, it’s not about migration. Pure politics.


QUESTION: These are really good questions. Why don't you ask the Prime Minister himself on Nine News. We'll offer you a platform to do so, to go head to head with him. Why aren't you doing a prime time, head to head debate with the Prime Minister.
ANSWER: Look forward to it, cheerio.


QUESTION: No, that's not -
ANSWER: About a million Australian families will benefit from our initiative on child care. Everywhere I’ve travelled in Australia as Opposition Leader, one of the single biggest problems that people tell me is that everything is going up except their wages and child care is in one of the biggest things which is going up in price. It has gone up 24 per cent in the last six years. So what’s happening is mum and dad go to work and most of mum's wages are just going to pay the child care. So what we’re doing is we have made economic reform decisions to make sure that we spend more money helping people with the cost of child care and our proposals today, specifically for nearly a million families, mean somewhere between $1,500 and $2,100 back to families which they are currently spending on child care.


QUESTION: Why not prime time, that's when we have most eyes and ears.
ANSWER: Well good point. We are keeping an eye on this. We’ve asked the ACCC - as we give the subsidy to the parents we don't want the operators saying hmmm, yummy, we like that $2,000 subsidy we’ll increase the cost of fees. So first of all the ACCC is going to have the powers to monitor it. But if that doesn’t work I'm putting on the table today on your show we will look at introducing price controls like we do for private health insurers. I think that we want the money to go to parents, not to see more profit being gouged by particular operators.


QUESTION: At night time -
ANSWER: Well come along to Box Hill today where we’re going to talk more about how we are going to look after early childhood educators. Early childhood educators, it is a 96 per cent female dominated industry. I think that it is paid less than other male dominated industries because there are so many women working in it. You know it is a most important job. These are the first adults who we trust our kids to out of the family unit, so I think we should pay early childhood educators more. You will hear more about that later.


QUESTION: You've got a big program, why wouldn't you want to debate everyone and everywhere.
ANSWER: Well what we can do is we can make sure that if we are going to provide some support for the wages of early childhood educators, again we will say to the operators if Labor is providing some modest improvement in the wages of childhood educators, if Labor is providing a couple of thousand dollars a year for parents, what we say to the childcare operators is you don't get to pocket that. We want childcare to be sustainable, we want cost of living to be tackled and we want to see that the people working in the industry get a fair deal.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for this debate.
ANSWER: No, not at all. What’s happening now is that this government is raising record taxes and they spend it on property investors on their sixth house with negative gearing. This is a government who is not tough on multinationals paying their fair share. Instead of being slack on the multinationals, instead of giving away unsustainable tax giveaways to property investors to buy their sixth house, we want to use that money to help subsidise the child care industry so that parents on the front line get cost of living relief.


QUESTION: Right thanks mate.
ANSWER: Well we’ll release our figures before the election is concluded, but we’ve also made clear that we think we need to wind back what we give to negative gearing.


QUESTION: The Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten, joins me now from Melbourne. Thank you very much for being with us.
ANSWER: We will do that closer to the election but suffice to say we have done our maths and we are able to pay for the promises we are making. Once we have revealed all of our promises, then we will reveal the costings to back it up.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, you're unapologetically running for government on a big new agenda. So let's run through some of the detail of it beginning with climate change. Can we go back to first principles. Is it a fact that moving to a lower emissions economy will impose a short-term economic cost?
ANSWER: We will once we have announced all of our policies. That will be very soon. But the point about it is that there are tens of billions of dollars going in unsustainable tax concessions, tens of billions of dollars. We think it is a better investment, rather than giving a subsidy to someone to buy their sixth house to spend it on child care relief for a million Australian families.


QUESTION: So if there is a short-term economic cost, you have a 45 per cent target for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, what will be the estimated cost of that to the economy over the next decade, not in dollar terms, but as a percentage of economic growth?
ANSWER: That's a really good point. First of all, the government loves to say that if we are not going to give a tax subsidy to a property investor, somehow that’s a property tax. It’s not. What currently happens in negative gearing - and first of all, anyone who is currently invested under negative gearing rules won't be affected. So it is a future change. What happens is when the government gives a subsidy, a reward for investing in your sixth or seventh property, that's an expenditure. That means we are using tax income and we are giving it to a property investor for making a loss. Instead of giving that tax money to a property investor for making a loss, I would rather give it to parents. So it is not an increase in tax. What it actually is, is it’s a reallocation of priorities. I want to give it to …


QUESTION: But if you have firms that have to be shifting and making the transition to having lower carbon emissions, that may mean that they have less money to spend on other forms of investment, it may mean they have lower profits so therefore they have less money to deliver in the form of company tax into government coffers. Those things could have a spin-off impact on to the GDP numbers?
ANSWER: Well it’s a matter of priorities. This is the truth in Australia at the moment. If you have a lot of capital you’re taxed very lightly. If you earn income you’re taxed much more heavily. What I want to do is to have a fairer, equitable system. Instead of just giving the property investors and the multinationals a lighter deal what we want to do is to use some of that money which we’re giving to them and reallocate it to spend it on child care. I would rather see a million Australian families, households whose incomes are less than $170,000 a year, get a couple of thousand dollars of tax relief than give that money either through slack tax laws to multinationals or through giving it to property investors. It is a matter of priorities.


QUESTION: I don't assume that there's no cost to doing nothing. I accept your position there's a long-term benefit. What I'm asking you to do is to square with the voters about exactly what the short-term cost is of getting to that position?
ANSWER: Well, the fact of the matter is we are arguing for a change in Australia. We don't want to - I mean, I think this Government is disgraceful in that they are offering a thread-bare policy agenda. All they are offering Australians is basically an unfunded tax cut in five years’ time, more of this trickle-down economics where the wealthy get wealthier and maybe a few crumbs come off the table for working families in this country. By contrast, we are saying let's change our tax system. Let’s stop giving money away to the top end of town. Let's start spending on the vast bulk of working, middle class.


QUESTION: But what is the initial -
ANSWER: Because for the last three years, and indeed six years, we have been united. We are putting all our policies out there. You know you say you have got to give everything by the end of the election. We will. But the point about it is, we are putting out a lot of significant policies. We have been upfront with the people. We told people three years ago we intend to change the negative gearing rules, prospectively. We told people that we wanted to go after multinationals.


QUESTION: Isn't it a reasonable -
ANSWER: You can't have it all ways, you can't say when will you tell people...


QUESTION: But -
ANSWER: Well I've explained that I didn't understand the question that was being asked.


QUESTION: But if we could stick with Labor -
ANSWER: Let's go through each of those points rather than rapid fire, let's have a conversation. First of all, we have outlined our policies for the last three years. Now you say people haven't been paying attention, fair enough, that's your view. But you can't say that we haven't been upfront. Then you have gone to a couple of specific examples. Now when we talk about tax relief, the fact of the matter is that for the next three years, Liberal and Labor are offering the same deal to Australian people but where the disagreement comes is this government is...


QUESTION: You can't just pluck a number out of nowhere. You've come up with the 45 per cent target.
ANSWER: Yes, for the vast bulk of people we are offering the same thing. You are quite right, for the three per cent of tax earners we still think we need a budget repair levy until 22-23. So you are right there. But the point about it is if we are going to have a proper tax system in the country, we've got to start looking after income earners as opposed to taxing capital lightly and income more heavily. Or to put in plain English, how on earth are we a country who has the negative gearing rules or tax credit rules on shares which are unique in the world. I don't want to be the best in the world at tax loopholes, I want to be the best in the world at cost of living relief for childcare and for kinder and for aged care and for schools and hospitals.


QUESTION: But if you are choosing that yes we will go with that number, with 45 per cent, you must have done...
ANSWER: There couldn't have been anyone who was committing me to a preference deal. No, not aware of that. There is always conversations...


QUESTION: But as a government you are adopting it as your policy. You must have done some projections short-term to what that will mean to GDP. Will it take say 0.1 per cent off GDP, 0.5 per cent off GDP over 10 years?
ANSWER: Hang on a second. As you would know as a seasoned journalist, there is always plenty of conversations. But you also understand, someone who has covered politics for a long time, that me and Labor, could not do a deal with a person who still owes the taxpayer nearly $70 million, owes workers an additional $7 million. That's a deal breaker for us.


QUESTION: Let's turn to the Adani coal mine in Queensland. If there's a miner sitting in Rockhampton tonight watching and she wants to know, "Mr Shorten, do you reckon this mine will be a good thing for my industry and for Queensland?" What would you say to her?
ANSWER: Only one leader in this country has done a deal with Clive Palmer.


QUESTION: If we can stick to Adani for now?	ANSWER: No. No. We are not doing that and let's be really clear here - there is no way that you can do a preference deal without me signing off on it. And somehow, though, what the Government is trying to do is look away from the deal they have done. There is one question which has not been satisfactorily
answered. For Mr Morrison to give his preferences to Clive Palmer, for the Nationals, the Coalition partner, to give their preferences to One Nation, what have they promised Pauline Hanson and Clive Palmer? The reality is for Labor the price of doing a deal with Clive Palmer, too high. Not worth it.


QUESTION: We'll go to a range of other things shortly.
ANSWER: Well first of all you know that we’ve offered Channel Nine the opportunity to do it through the Press Club. You have declined.


QUESTION: In an interview with me on 7:30 in April last year you said, "I'm a sceptic of the project, I'm not a fan of the project. I'm happy to tell people my personal opinion." So your position has changed since then?
ANSWER: You've declined. I am sorry if you are busy at lunchtime. The point about it is...


QUESTION: You're less sceptical of it now?
ANSWER: They have invented iView You know it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day -


QUESTION: How about the environmental one?
ANSWER: You know, it is possible to do an interview at one point in the day and replay it. I often see that. But the point about it is, ABC want a debate, Channel Nine want a debate, the Press Club want a debate. It's not really for me to sort out...


QUESTION: Various Labor candidates and MPs have had differing positions on Adani, it seems a little confusing what the party's actual position is. What do you say to the suggestion that you've created that situation by saying one thing to people in regional Queensland and one thing to environmentalists?
ANSWER: Yeah, but do you know what? For the last six years we have been debating the Liberals. We are talking to the people. We've got three debates with the Government. I tell you what I do find extraordinary. I mean I can't sort out Nine and Two, I don't want to pick favourites. The point about it is we are going to Western Australia because they have never had a debate before. There is normally three debates in any federal election. That's the precedent. Let's go to the heart of the matter. If we want to talk about debate, where is their industrial relations minister to talk about wages policy? Where is their energy minister? Where is their environment minister talking about climate change? Where is their education minister? This is a Government where apart from Mr Morrison, they are silencing most of their colleagues.


QUESTION: Okay -
ANSWER: I enjoyed the debate.


QUESTION: And I'll have the chance to ask the Prime Minister about some of that when he comes on the program. Let's move on to some other areas, you would have heard in our earlier story 83-year-old Chris Phillips, the retired carpenter who has $36,000 a year in income and he will lose $9,000 per year under your franking credits policy. Your policy is driving somebody like Chris heavily on to the public purse isn't it for everything from healthcare to social welfare?
ANSWER: See you.


QUESTION: Will your negative gearing policy make houses cheaper?
ANSWER: I will get Tanya to supplement this but let's go to some of the macro numbers here. This Government when it talks about childcare, cut people's childcare and other people got an improvement. Under our new scheme, no one goes backwards. So, just to repeat the good news for Australian families. A family household income up to $68,000 will get 100 per cent subsidy up to the capped hours, be it $11.77. One hundred per cent. That's free childcare. A family household between $68,000 and $100,000, they'll get around 85 per cent subsidy which is also very good news and an improvement on the status quo. That will save them $1500 or so every year. That is per child. So for a couple of kids, $3K. That's not to be sneezed at. Then family household incomes between $100,000 and $174,000, the subsidy will taper down but it is still more generous than what the current Coalition is offering working families. So it will be from 85 per cent to 60 per cent. That will be a benefit of between $1200 and $1400 for families. I'll get Tanya to supplement.


QUESTION: So what's the point of having it then? Because I seem to recall when it was introduced, it was partly to make housing more affordable?	ANSWER: I thought Tanya
answered that. The point is that the Government, they can't help themselves because they are so busy defending the top end of town with their unsustainable tax cuts, they try and do all the good policies on the cheap. How is it they came up with a childcare policy, which in order to see three families benefit, knocked off the fourth family? We've said we will review that. We want to see how that's working. We are not convinced it's working well. But the good news for Australian families, to cut through the clutter and white noise of the election, if childcare matters to you, if you're worried that your household budget is being knocked around by the cost of childcare, Labor is so far ahead of the Coalition in our offerings on childcare, just not funny.


QUESTION: You say it won't drive housing prices down by very much. Can Australia afford to adopt a policy that drives housing prices down at the moment at all given that the Reserve Bank said in its last minutes that rapidly falling housing prices are currently a downside risk in the economy?	ANSWER: There are a number of points in that but I'll be as brief as I can. I think you're right, Olivia. Everything is going up in Australia except people's wages. Wages are stagnating. That's a fact. This government has broken the sort of records no government should ever want to break in terms of low wages growth. That's a problem. In terms of how we help workers get wage rises in a modest and meaningful way, we've already suggested a number of policies in the course of last week. The Government is suspiciously silent on raising wages. Of course, we're in the home state of Mathias Cormann who famously said low wages is the economic architecture of Liberals, so they're happy. But we have picked childcare workers to go first. I think this is a strategically important industry. We talk a lot about the national interest but what could be more in the national interest than the quality care and education of our zero to five year olds? That is pretty important. These are the first workers, the first adults in our children's lives we trust outside the family unit and they work hard. The lovely lady Emma who we just spoke to before. Eleven years in the industry, two years here. She has plenty of friends who come in with the best hopes in the world but the money is so crap, the money is so bad, that they have had to sacrifice their passion just to make ends meet. We're going to change that. So we have deliberately said that we think the early childhood educators is an area where the normal system is not working. If you're in the private sector, say you're in the media or say you're in mining or say you're in, I don't know, manufacturing. You can go and bargain with your boss to try to get a wage rise. But the fact of the matter is childcare has a lot of government funding so when the government funding is tight there is simply no money for the wage rise. So, if you like, childcare workers are caught in a Catch-22 by the economics of childcare. If we don't put more money into the industry then you can never get a wage rise. But if you can never get a wage rise, we keep churning the good workers. So what we've come up with is a policy which is not dissimilar to what was done when Labor was last in government for housing, community sector workers, where you pick industries where they are predominantly feminised. In this case, did you know childcare is 96 per cent women so it's no coincidence that their the pay is low because that's the sort of in-built bias in the system. What we've said is we will find money in an orderly manner across ten years, or across eight years I think we've spelt out. Then, we'll sit down with the employers, with the industry, with the parents, with the independent umpire and work out how we can do it. But what we bring to the table is good will. And more than good will, we are willing to find money. This is a government who is willing to find $77 billion - although they haven't told us where it is coming from, what cuts they are going to make - to pay for a tax cut for the top three per cent. We've explained how we're raising our money. We've been upfront with the people for the last three years and this is the dividend of these reforms. Everyone knows wages in early childhood are too low. Parents know it. Industry knows it. If any of you have got kids, you'd know it too. But there hasn't been a proper
answer until now. We can't just ask the parents to pay more. They are already struggling with the bills. The industry is a hybrid of for-profit and not-for-profit. They don't have the money to give significant wage rises. The other alternative is we can just keep going along asking childcare workers to subsidise the children by not getting wage rises. We've come up with a neat solution and it makes sense. There is some precedent and we'll work through it in a calm...


QUESTION: I'll come to some of those points in a second. I just want to ask about another of your controversial policies which is superannuation...
ANSWER: We haven't won the election, yet.


QUESTION: Superannuation I'm talking about. Paul Keating and others set up superannuation so it would entice people to save for their retirement so they would be less of a burden on Government across all demographics. Why are you making it less enticing for any Australian given that that's the whole point of it?
ANSWER: Thank you for that optimism. I believe our policies will see sensible movements in wages. This nation can't keep bumping along at the bottom in terms of wages. I know, for example, that we will reverse these unfair cuts, arbitrary cuts to penalty rates. That will mean that hundreds of thousands of people will get a wage rise. I know our plan here for early childhood educators will see in our first term modest and sensible increases. I know that when we improve the bargaining laws, that will crack down on sham contracting, we will stamp out the abuse of temporary work visas from overseas. I have been around this business for 30 years. I understand what we have got to do to get wages moving again and we will. But it will be done with business, it will be done recognising capacity to pay. But you know we have got a big problem in Australia. Confidence is flat. We're seeing household savings being spent. We saw zero per cent inflation in the last quarter. That shows you that people are just basically hunkering down under this Liberal Government. What we need is a bit of confidence back in the system and that is what we will bring to Australia.


QUESTION: You spoke about the tax on income versus the tax on capital. Paul Keating made a point in a letter to the editor of the Financial Review last August that having 49 percent as the top marginal tax rate is way too high, especially when company tax is 30 percent. Where's Labor going to draw the line on relying on the rich to fund new spending? For example would more than 50 percent as the top marginal income tax rate be too much? Would 60 percent be where you'd draw the line? Where would you draw it?
ANSWER: I'm not aware of that. In terms of Mr Palmer, why is to hard for billionaires to pay the taxpayers the money they owe them? Why is it that there is one rule for the rest of us and another rule for him and Scott Morrison? If you owed the Government $10,000, for longer than a year, the Tax Office would give you a ring, wouldn't they? They might  give you a letter. They will chase you up. But apparently in this country if you owe $70 million to the taxpayer not only does the Government not worry about it - it wants your preferences. In fact it wants to elect you to the Senate. it's a whole new strategy in Australian politics. I am lucky enough to have Tanya here, she's been giving this matter quite a degree of reflection.


QUESTION: Let’s talk about what you might control if you are the Prime Minister by the end of the month, you've said that you'll deliver a 20 percent wage increase to childcare workers, that it's the only sector for which you'll do that because it's unique. What's unique about childcare workers but not aged care workers or disability carers?
ANSWER: Well, the election hasn't been decided yet. But having said that, we'll deal with whatever the Australian people give us in the Senate. But if Clive Palmer gets into the Senate, I blame Scott Morrison. Because the only way that bloke can be on electoral life support is because the Liberal and National Party are putting him there. This is turning Australian politics into a joke, isn't it? Let's go back to the fundamentals. Mr Morrison was the Treasurer who repaid Mr Palmer's $70 million worth of debts to the workers and that therefore means Mr Palmer owes the Government that $70 million. But instead of getting the $70 million out of Clive Palmer, Clive Palmer said, "I will give you my preferences." And all of a sudden when Clive Palmer was the sort of bad guy in the Liberal dictionary, all of a sudden, get the preferences, he's a good guy, don't bother me about his debts. So in the Senate we have got to stop it feeding the extremists. The problem is now that the Morrison Government is so desperate that when you vote for Scott Morrison you're voting for the Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government. Australians are sick of the circus of Australian politics. A vote for Mr Morrison pretty much guarantees Mr Palmer in the Senate, Ms Hanson in the Senate and more chaos for three years. Vote Labor in the House and vote Labor in the Senate to avoid more chaos and confusion.


QUESTION: Everybody would agree with that but doesn't it set a precedent -
ANSWER: Well I am not sure that the people who preselected him knew of all of these posts. But I don't think he should be our candidate. Just before we all shout... So I don't think he should be our candidate any more and I understand that it is in train for him to step down as our candidate. And I hope that Mr Palmer is willing to do something about the 20 candidates he has got with Constitutional eligibility clouds over their heads. And I hope that Mr Morrison can show the same certainty of purpose as I've just displayed.


QUESTION: Doesn't it set a precedent for the Federal Government to pay wages for other private sector workers in the form of direct subsidies?
ANSWER: That is going to be a matter between them and the police. I don't know anything about it. When it comes to adhering to the law though I want to make it clear, no one is above the law, not the CFMEU, not their officials, nor the banks. And always remember that our friend the current Prime Minister voted 26 times to cover up the banks' behaviour, voted 26 times against a banking royal commission. And indeed your question goes to the heart of making sure we have got a better trust in the system. That's why we need a national integrity commission. And I do not know why Western Australian Attorney-General Christian Porter keeps resisting having an anti-corruption commission. Perhaps one more question.


QUESTION: When we take all of the policies that we've talked about tonight, is it fair for a viewer to conclude that a Shorten Labor Government will be at its core about the redistribution of wealth, that you want to take more from the wealthy and give more to people on lower incomes?
ANSWER: You're not reporting accurately what Tanya said. But in terms of mining, you in fact do remind me kindly of our announcement about the future of mining. Today Jason Clare and I have announced and I guess it is a good news story so not as exciting but it is a $75 million commitment to invest in the future of mining. Did you know in Australia that we haven't had a tier 1 mining discovery since 2005? That is tier 1, very high quality, underground. The rest of the world has reported three tier 1 discoveries every year. Did you know about $221 billion that we make in mining exports, 80 per cent of it comes from mining deposits which were discovered 40 years ago. We don't properly map underground Australia. So Labor is putting in $75 million to help work with geoscience, work with the mining industry so we can exploit our mineral deposits. Another good bit of news is we are putting in $2 million to fund 50 mining engineering scholarships in Western Australia.


QUESTION: But as I said, when we go through your policies, a lot of where you're getting your revenue from is taxes on wealthy people, closing loopholes that mostly wealthy people can exploit and you're wanting to spend money on lower income people. How is that not a form of changing the economy towards a model of redistribution?
ANSWER: I don't mind repeating what I said earlier, because it is an important point so I appreciate your giving me the chance to do that. No I don't see this as being economy-wide this approach, at all. But I do accept that in certain sectors of the economy we have a wages problem, don't we? And I would put it to you, childcare educators, there is only four things that can be done. One, they just never get a pay rise. Well that's not good is it? I think you would agree with that. Thirty per cent turnover, very important the development of kids. Two, we ask the parents to pay a lot more. That's not really viable either is it with the cost of living crisis under this government? Three we just ask all the operators to increase their costs, to not pass it on to anyone. That's not economically rational or reasonable either. Or four, the Government assists, provide money to the childcare sector so that workers can get better wages. This is a problem everybody acknowledges. If all of us agree that childcare wages are too low and if I did a quick survey here of all of you, is $21 or $22 or $23 an hour, really is it enough for someone with a Cert. III or Diploma in childcare? You and I know it is not enough.


QUESTION: But if you - if you reject the assertion -	ANSWER: You asked the question and I am giving you an
answer. So if we know there is a problem, it's then a matter of choices. And that is what this election is about. It's about choices. Today across Australia the pre-poll voting is opening. It's estimated that up to 40 per cent of people will vote before May 18. So I say to people who have to vote at pre-poll today, tomorrow or in the next three weeks, this election is about a choice. You can either give billions of dollars to negative gearing and property investors or you can properly fund early childhood educators' wages. You can either give billions of dollars away by not policing loopholes for the top end of town or you can provide $2000 to middle class families struggling with the cost of childcare. This election is about choices and we are making choices. I want to clamp down on unsustainable tax subsidies for the top end of town. And do you know what? I want three million Aussie pensioners to be able to know that they can get a decent set of teeth and afford to go to the dentist. Thank you, see you around.


QUESTION: No, no, no, but what I want you to do is try to do it -
ANSWER: Are there any questions ?


QUESTION: Because if I'm wrong, if I am wrong and it's the core of your government is not about taxing wealthy people to redistribute income to lower incomes, in a sentence, what is going to be the core of the Shorten Labor Government?	ANSWER: Alright, I think I understand your question, it's about the cost of climate change and the cost of our policies. I've got Mark Butler here today as well, which as a little aside, I've got my climate change minister with me, we're in Western Australia, I don't think, a little prize could get Melissa Price photographed with Scott Morrison, while they're over here talking about climate. But that's just the small part. The big picture is, as we heard last night in the debate, this government has got every excuse in the book not to take action on climate change. Climate change is real. Climate change is extracting a big cost as you said correctly, Greg. It's estimated at $18 billion dollars a year in natural disasters and some of that is obviously due to more extreme weather events and climate. Sorry, Greg I'm going to do you the courtesy of your three point question and get I and Mark to
answer it if you will let me. Now on the cost of climate change, we think there is a big cost. You and I know that this government is going down every rabbit hole, down every burrow, on every sideshow, to avoid one fact: they don't have a climate policy, do they? I mean if they were going to have a climate policy which was serious Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. But you talk about modelling, why don't I get Mark to talk about the plethora of material which is already there.


QUESTION: That's a matter for me to Scott Morrison about. With all -	ANSWER: Well first of all we think childcare is a unique sector. So the model in which we're going to finally sort out the underpayment of early childhood educators is a model, a template which we will only use in childcare. In terms of the first industry to see wages movement we have other mechanisms to help other industries. Now I make no apology for the fact that I want to reverse the penalty rate cuts which have seen, as the McKell Institute says, if they are not reversed, $2.8 billion dollars of pay taken out of the pockets of hundreds of thousands of low paid workers in restaurants, in accommodation, in pharmacy. So we've got a range of different strategies. But for early childhood educators, it almost, this government is so mean-spirited, Mr Morrison must have a very warped view of how you treat underpayment of workers in childcare. To rule it out, to say we won’t fix childcare unless everyone else gets an identical pay rise – well this is just absurd. The fact of the matter is and you may be aware that if you look at 96 occupational categories in Australia, childcare comes in at the 92nd lowest paid. 92nd. And it’s no coincidence in my opinion that it’s an industry predominantly populated by women, in other words 96 per cent of the workforce are women. So when you join the dots, a feminised industry, underpaid, early childhood education, underpaid. We've come up with a plan to help early childhood educators. I mean, the poverty of Mr Morrison’s wages policy, we heard it in the debate last night where when he was asked about wages he started talking about emissions reduction. You know join those dots for me. But the point about it is he doesn’t have a plan for peoples wages and the only
answer that his poor old minister Birmingham gave today or last night about early childhood educators, he said 'get the providers to pay them more'. Well that's a great plan Simon because the providers will make parents pay more. So Mr Birmingham’s only plan to help early childhood educators is to make parents pay. We don’t have that plan, we've come up with I think a special solution to deal... and you don’t have to take my word for it, ask all the parents who send their kids to childcare.


QUESTION: If you need to have a glass of water while I ask the question, please feel free.
ANSWER: We think that the RBA should be independent in terms of its setting of monetary policy. The RBA has said that it likes to see inflation between two and three per cent. I think the bigger problem or the bigger challenge for me isn't what the RBA says inflation should be, it’s the fact in the last quarter inflation was zero per cent. Can I tell you, that’s the equivalent of the alarm going off in the fire station. When you've got zero per cent inflation that means people aren't spending money. The reason why people aren't spending money is under this government they're unconfident. And one of the reasons they're unconfident is we see cuts to schools and hospitals. We also see wage stagnation. You know Mr Morrison loves to talk about a strong economy. But a strong economy for exactly who? The reality is that there is one million Australians that have got to hold down two jobs to make ends meet. There’s one million Australians plus who every month say they'd like more work. The reality is that we've seen prices going up, cost of living, childcare, healthcare, energy prices. This economy is not working in the interests of middle and working class people. Under Mr Morrison it’s never been a better time to be a high-priced CEO or a multinational in Australia. Under Mr Morrison it’s never been a worse time to be a middle class wage earner in this country.


QUESTION: If - you listed out that list of things that you would like to deliver, the issue for you in an election campaign are that voters have to trust that you will actually deliver on that. Why should they trust Labor to deliver on that? You'd point, for example, just to your last thing there, to chaos. People remember the last couple of terms of Labor in office.
ANSWER: That was the metaphor I used.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, we've covered a lot of ground tonight. I'm sure our viewers appreciate your time very much. Thank you.	ANSWER: I think this government's economic record is pretty bloody hopeless. Let's just call it as it is. Let me
answer your question, you've asked. First of all let’s go to some key numbers. Under this government, debt has gone up. Debt has doubled under this government. That's a problem because if interest rates go up all of a sudden Australians will be stuck with paying bigger interest rate payments on a government’s national debt that they’ve run up. We've got the problem of under-employment. We’ve got the problem of wages stagnation, now you see zero per cent inflation. This economy is not operating in the interests of working people. What we've got is a government with a very threadbare policy offering. You all saw, well hopefully you all saw the debate last night. What we saw is two contrasting policies. We've got a positive vision for the future. We understand that if you invest in education you're going to get a productive workforce in the future. We understand that if you aim for the world’s best healthcare system you're going to have healthier Australians. We understand that when you take on cost of living and don't just leave it, that what we do is we see price restraint in childcare, private health insurance. More renewables will ultimately mean lower prices. We're the only party with a wages policy and we want to take real action on climate change. By contrast, what did Mr Morrison offer viewers watching last night? His only argument for re-election is that he's not Labor. I mean his only argument is very threadbare. You and I know this is the most threadbare policy offering in a century of Australian elections. They just basically say it'll trickle down. If we look after the top 10 per cent, the top 5 per cent, maybe you'll get more tips on your plate when you go out to lunch. They say that they’re going to give you tax cuts in five years’ time. But do they explain to you where the money's coming from? They’re promising you unfunded tax plans on the never-never which can only be delivered if there are cuts to hospitals, and services and they're promising business as usual. That’s not good enough for Australia. The Australian people need a government worthy of the people.


QUESTION: On your announcement today Mr Shorten, there are number of examples of renewable projects in the Upper Spencer falling over, the solar thermal plant in Port Augusta for the most recent example, how is this plan going to change anything?
ANSWER: He should have. His comments were appalling, absolutely appalling. Should have resigned. But it just I think highlights the bigger problem this desperate Morrison government has. No wonder they're cranky in their public presentation at the moment. They realise that they've pulled the wrong reins. They've made as their key allies Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party and Clive Palmer. You know, this is chaotic. Imagine if Mr Morrison sneaks home at the election, courtesy of Pauline Hanson's One Nation and Clive Palmer. Imagine if we have a country who if you vote Liberal or One Nation or Palmer United party and you have Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson calling the shots to the government. I mean does anyone seriously believe that Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson just give their preferences to Mr Morrison without there being an IOU on the other side of the election? I promise you this - a vote for Morrison is a vote for Hanson and Palmer and it's a vote for chaos, chaos, chaos.


QUESTION: Some of the issue was getting workers to the upper Spencer area. How are you going to solve that problem with your plan?
ANSWER: I think that aged care workers are underpaid. But we have got a Royal Commission under way, let's see what the Royal Commission produces in the way of it. I want to pay a compliment to our aged care workers. They do a lot of work with a lot of vulnerable people. I think that we need to invest more in aged care generally. But I think let's have the Royal Commission. The solution that we have looked at for early childhood educators is a recognition that nothing else has worked. They are underpaid, they're highly trained, and it is long overdue that we do the right thing.


QUESTION: Mr Butler on climate change yesterday you said it was impossible to model Labor's policies but Labor has also promised that the details will be released before the election. Which is it? Impossible to cost? Or will costings be released?
ANSWER: Our plan is that all childcare workers would see an improvement in their wages.


QUESTION: Would you rule out another climate deal with the Greens? And do you think that the Gillard Greens deal in 2011 was a success?
ANSWER: First of all the RBA has got to make its decisions independent of government pressure. So the decision they make, I'm not going to start putting pressure on them. I think though that if they felt they had to do that, that is not a reflection on the Reserve Bank. It is a reflection on the Australian Government isn't it? This is a government who has boasted about their strong economic management but the fact that we are even talking about an interest rate cut shows the anaemic weakness in the current government's economic management. What this nation needs is we need to make sure that we are not just relying on our mineral exports, as important as they are, to prop up our economy. We need to go back to the fundamentals. Let's invest in people, let's invest in infrastructure. You know let's invest in our human capital and let's invest in our physical infrastructure. We've got a plan, for example, in Western Australia to invest in Metronet. We've got a plan to make sure in Victoria or in Queensland we invest in key public transport and of course the Bruce Highway and you name it, we've been looking at infrastructure. That's good, that's more productivity. We want to upgrade our ports and upgrade our airports. The other part of our economic growth plan is to invest in people. The beauty of what Labor is suggesting, the vision under our plan, which we are trusting the Australian people with by telling them what we are going to do as we should. Imagine if we are a country where every three and four year old actually gets kindergarten. Fifteen hours a week, forty weeks a year. That just means they get the best start in life. That's world's best practice, it's only just good enough for Australia. Imagine if we are a country that puts back the $14 billion that the current government promised for public schools but never did. Imagine if every kid can go to a school regardless of their postcode, regardless of the wealth of their parents, the size of the school, get a quality education. Imagine if you're a parent of a child with a disability and you don't get treated like a bully merely because you demand for a fair go for your child. Imagine if we have 200,000 more people going to university in the next 10 years. Imagine if we can restore the 150,000 apprenticeships, traineeships, which have disappeared under the current government. Why don't we in this country have a debate about how can we be the best in the world? Imagine if a million Australian households actually get real help, $1000, $1500, $2000 a year to help with their childcare subsidies. And imagine if we were a country who doesn't desert our pensioners. Three million people are on the Commonwealth seniors health card or indeed on a pension, full or part. Imagine if we as a country decide that we are going to invest in the dental health of our older Australians. That's the sort of country which will grow into the future and where we see the fair go, not just for the top, but for everyone.


QUESTION: On health you've announced a range of health policies. Do you rule out in the next term of government lifting the Medicare levy for high income earners?
ANSWER: Well Miranda I know you've followed this issue extensively so thank you for your work on this topic. For me I've never been one who's been sectarian. And I think if you spoke to the Catholic Education Commissions around Australia they would agree that Tanya and I have been very good to work with. And so where that leaves your question is this. We don't think you should discriminate against people because of their sexuality. And I don't think most people do. And most people in the church accept that they've been working through these issues and it's working okay. But I also respect the right of parents to send their children to a school based upon the faith and the values taught in it. We will work through every issue. We will work through every issue. When I spoke to Bishops and leaders of churches, they agree. They don't want to see little children discriminated against. We will work through these issues. What I don't want to see is religion becoming a political football. That is why Labor led the case to make sure that the Catholic and low-fee Christian schools got their funding restored. My problem is of course that the government hasn't followed through with the government schools. We will work through this Miranda because I understand in Australia that it's not a question of majorities dictating to minorities. This country works best when we work together.


QUESTION: A few months ago, Chris Bowen said voters unconvinced about your plans for taxation were perfectly entitled to vote for other parties. What about voters unconvinced by your answers about climate change and working with the Greens? What should they do?
ANSWER: I'm not sure we do. But having said that we will always keep talking to people about it. I don't think anyone should be persecuted because of their faith. What I do also think is that if we are going to talk about priorities in this country - three million Aussie pensioners don't need to be forgotten in this election. Do you know the number of times I walk around in the community and the pensioners come up. These aren't people with a million dollars in shares and getting all the franking credits for not paying tax. I'm talking about three million battlers. And so many elections people have said what's in it for the pensioner? Now I know Mr Morrison says he indexes it every six months. Well every government does that. That's like giving yourself a medal for getting up in the morning. The real issue is what are we going to do extra for pensioners. And I'm making it very clear just as I've said this election is a referendum on wages, just because this election needs to be about real change in climate. This election also needs to be about you know cost of living and childcare. This election needs to be about our pensioners. And I and my united team, we're not going on with the antics of Palmer, Hanson et al. We've been doing the homework over the last six years and because of our economic reforms I can promise every pensioner in Australia, pensioners worried about their oral hygiene, their health, the cleaning, the costs of looking after their teeth. If you vote Labor at this election, we'll make sure in Medicare you've got up to $1,000 every two years for the rest of your life to make sure that you can have at least a fair go at having proper dental hygiene. Thanks everybody we'll see at the next gig.


QUESTION: I get that it's uncomfortable for you in an election campaign to say that you would go into a deal with the Greens, but doesn't everybody in this country know that you can't get your climate deal through any Parliament we could imagine without coalitions of some sort. So if you're not getting into bed with the Greens, who are you going to get into bed with to carry your climate plans?
ANSWER: I've got Mark Butler here to add to it but i just want to put the government on notice that the people of Australia are over excuses and delay and distraction on taking real action on climate change. We regard climate change and a real plan for it as one of the key four or five issues in this election. I am pleased to note that the AEC has reported that quarter of a million Australians have voted in the first two days. This is 100,000 more than at the same time in 2016. And what Labor people are telling me when they are handing out how to vote cards to vote Labor is that a lot of people are talking about climate change. I'll get Mark to go to your specifics.


QUESTION: Clive Palmer is going to be in town tomorrow. So is Mark Latham from One Nation. They're expected to announce Murray-Darling river plans. Will Labor have anything in addition to say about the Marray Darling basin plan before the election.
ANSWER: Well I see that the Greens are sort of trailing their coat and saying, "Look at me." The fact of the matter is that if we get elected we'll be making decisions in a Labor Cabinet and the decisions will be made by members of Parliament of the Labor Party. What we will do is we will implement the policies we've put forward. I think even our harshest critics would agree that we are the party who is putting forward policies in this election and we're outlining all of what we intend to do. We're not for switching because some independent MP or some Greens MP is suffering relevance deprivation and wants to see their name in the paper. And I tell you if you want to talks about the coalitions in Canberra there is only one coalition - the coalition of Mr Morrison, Ms Hanson and Mr Palmer and this is a coalition of chaos and cuts. If people are looking for stability at the next election, if they just want to be sure that who they vote for is who they're going to get, vote one Labor - and vote one Labor for real action on climate change.


QUESTION: He has.
ANSWER: We have no plan to lift the Medicare levy. The reason why I can say that with such confidence is because we're making the hard economic decisions. We're clamping down on the multinationals. We're not going to spend hundreds of billions of dollars on unfunded tax cuts as this government is promising. And what that means for Australians is if you're one of three million Australian pensioners or Commonwealth health seniors card-holders, you are going to get $1,000 assistance through Medicare every two years with your teeth. What our health promises mean is that if you are one of the two Australians who will be diagnosed with cancer by the time you're in your mid-80s, Labor is going to virtually reduce your out-of-pocket costs to as low as we possibly can. It means that if you use hospitals and you're waiting for arthroscopies, for knee surgeries, for hip replacements, for cataracts, Labor's got your back and we're going to reduce the out-of-pocket costs to see a doctor.


QUESTION: You said you want 50 per cent electric cars by 2030. If a Labor government wins the election, would you provide subsidies for, you know, Gupta electric cars or other providers?
ANSWER: First of all, we want as many people as possible to vote for us. And I will again, very briefly, not to not push your patience, I will again repeat - no coalition with the Greens. Sorry, Richard, it's not happening. And in terms of our taxation policies, you can do the maths yourself. We're offering a million Australian households help with their childcare. A subsidy to working parents, an additional $1,500 to $2,100 for every child in the system every year. We're going to look after the pensioners. I mean it's long overdue that someone did something for the pensioners. You don't have to put a wraparound ad on your bus. That's not action. That's propaganda. What you actually need is to really help the pensioners. We're really helping the pensioners by providing additional assistance in dental care.


QUESTION: Would you provide subsidies?
ANSWER: Tim, trust in politics is at an all-time low. And one of the ways Labor is going to rebuild trust in Australian politics is we'll tell people before an election what we intend to do after an election. The good news for us is that if we're elected, we're elected to implement our policies. I do not expect the Senate to stand in the way of our government, if we are elected, when we clearly outlined all our policies and have such a strong mandate in the event that we are elected.


QUESTION: With your emissions reduction target, you say that businesses will take the reins with how they choose to reduce pollution. How can you be sure that they will do that? Would you introduce civil penalties for non-compliance?
ANSWER: First of all, I understood that Mr Palmer has said he wants to rip up the plan.


QUESTION: Wasn't the safeguards mechanism introduced by Tony Abbott, not Malcolm Turnbull?
ANSWER: Well I think that's a disaster for South Australia. I mean Palmer is basically a billboard with no substance. He's a text message with no follow-through. What's happening here is Australian democracy is under threat. What we are actually seeing is Mr Palmer is trying to buy the Australian democratic system with $70 or $80 million. Unfortunately, Mr Morrison is his accomplice. I've got to say again - and I'll come back to you - Palmer can't pay for his promises. You all know that he makes it up. You all know that what he's done is he has basically hooked Morrison into whatever mad-cap schemes Palmer is going to run around and promise. People can sniff a fake a long way away and in terms of Mr Morrison, what was he thinking, letting himself be taken hostage to Mr Palmer or the extremists of One Nation? You know, you don't need to have a Rhodes Scholarship to work out that Clive Palmer never does anything for free. If Clive Palmer promises to do something for you, you can be reasonably sure there's strings attached.


QUESTION: It's interesting that you're using the Tony Abbott climate change mechanism.
ANSWER: What I've actually said is that we'd like to see 50 per cent of new car sales be electric vehicles. What Labor will do to help create, make that an option, is we want to help put in a network of charging stations so it's a real option for people. What we've also said is that government fleet purchasing requirements over that time will move towards more electric vehicles as part of our mix. The reason why we're doing this is twofold. One is, I know that around the world other people in other countries are getting access to cheaper electric vehicles which, of course, save your petrol bills. But in Australia, because we've got such a backward, technophobic, anti-climate change government, motorists are being denied cheaper options for their motor vehicles. So we think this is good on climate because it will help reduce emissions. We think it's also appropriate that Australia shouldn't become this sort of, you know, Albania of the southern hemisphere where in fact we are blocked away from new technology because we've got an ignorant, anti-scientific, anti-climate change, anti-technology government.


QUESTION: What are your assumptions on the amount of international credits that will be brought by business under your policy? And what are your assumptions on the future pricing of these credits? And I understand the PBO can't do costings but if you haven't got those assumptions, why not get them before the election from an economist?
ANSWER: No we don't have any plans to do that.


QUESTION: But do you have assumptions on the amount of international credits that business will buy because at the moment...	ANSWER: We have a safeguards mechanism. But what I'll do is I'll get Mark to supplement that
answer.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, on Jeremy Hearn, a couple of days ago, your Senate candidate in the Northern Territory resigned after sharing anti-Semitic posts on social media. If one candidate is responsible and reflective of the entire party, aren't Labor also in trouble on this?
ANSWER: No. There's a world of difference here. First of all, this fellow, who I haven't met, who was in the Northern Territory Senate ticket, I don't think that what he did anyone is contrasting with the complete Islamaphobia of the Liberals. But nonetheless, not appropriate. Gone. But goodness me when will we finally admit what everyone actually knows? The Liberal Party is riddled with right-wing extremists. It doesn't matter if it's Andrew Hastie contradicting Ian Goodenough or Ian Goodenough contradicting Andrew Hastie about what right-wing nutter they meet with or indeed this Islamaphobe, this racist. You know after Christchurch what do you need to get people to wake up in the Liberal Party and say it's unacceptable? But the real problem here is that it just confirms another day the Liberal Party of Australia is riddled with right-wing extremists. The Liberal Party is making, and the National Party are making preference arrangements with right-wing extremists like the One Nation Party. I mean we've had chaos in the last six years. And people are sick of the chaos. But because of Mr Morrison's personal choices to work with Clive Palmer, because of his coalition partner - I mean they're in the Coalition except when it suits the Nats to say they're not and do a dirty deal with One Nation. You know there's a pattern of behaviour emerging here that the Liberals and Nationals are riddled with right-wing extremists and the one thing it means, as people vote today and tomorrow and right through to May 18, is that if you're sick of the instability and chaos, vote Labor at the next election.


QUESTION: Just on climate change, do you acknowledge the simple fact that you're asking Australians to vote for something without knowing what the full cost of it will be? And can you understand why that worries people?
ANSWER: No, I don't agree with any of the assumptions in that question for the following reasons. The Australian people have already worked out what the Liberal Party haven't. Climate change is real. I don't need to give a lecture about climate change to two million Australians who've put solar power on their rooftop. They see the advantages of moving to renewables. It's without a doubt one of the top two or three issues in this election. People are actually sick and tired of politicians. They're sick and tired of the fear and the scare campaigns. They're sick and tired of lazy, right-wing, anti-climate change governments coming up with every excuse in the world to say the future's too hard. We're in a childcare centre. These kids have a reasonable expectation that the adults and the leaders in their world will be as optimistic about the future as our young people are. What optimism or hope is there in the future of Australia when you vote for the Liberal Nationals who basically hate doing anything on climate change? If this government was fair dinkum on climate change Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister of Australia. Thanks, everybody. We'll see you at the next function.


QUESTION: (inaudible) Are you concerned that people in northern Tasmania’s arts community might feel dudded by the $50 million MONA pledge and see it effectively as a handout to a wealthy entrepreneur in the state's south?
ANSWER: Well, I was in Whyalla today, talking to the people who run OneSteel and they made it clear that they're investing in more renewable energy. So there is a cost to investing in new technology but they're absolutely convinced that the only way we will keep making steel in Australia is by investing in renewable energy. I had the same discussion up at Sun Metals in zinc in Townsville, or indeed let's just talk to the two million Australian householders who have invested in solar power. There is an initial cost and depending on the deals they can get, but most people who go to solar on households they don't go back, do they?


QUESTION: Have you been approached to fund or are you considering funding aerobridges for Hobart and Launceston airports and improving commuter safety.
ANSWER: It won't have a negative effect on economic growth. In fact, most of the mainstream modelling shows that our economy will continue to grow.


QUESTION: The Greens came to Launceston yesterday and they announced their national health policy and they are looking to see dental care included under Medicare. Do you have a response to that?
ANSWER: The problem with what you're saying is that you assume that there's no cost to doing nothing, and there is. That's why Australians wants real change at this election. They're sick of doing nothing.


QUESTION: Will you work with the Greens though on more coverage?
ANSWER: Well, my absolute conviction and belief, is that if we don't change, then the cost will be far greater than any initial investments.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten on the Indigenous voice to Parliament, if you go to the people without a fully formed model, does that open up the chance of a fear campaign? Does it make it harder to sell to the public? And on top of that, you're also planning a first term Republican plebiscite - is it too much? Is it too many things to sell with these big votes?
ANSWER: If you're asking me to specify what a particular company in a particular factory will have to do, I can't do that, nor could you, nor can the Government.


QUESTION: How much money has Labor set aside to help drought-proof our farmers?
ANSWER: Let's be fair here, Leigh. Let’s be fair. I'm not going to get caught up in this Government came of gotcha when you have got to invent a number which you can't possibly.


QUESTION: The foreign fighter laws that weren't passed by Parliament before it was prorogued, would you put them to a vote in the first week of your government in you're successful at the election?
ANSWER: There's 250 companies caught by our safeguards mechanism, the same safeguard mechanism the current government applies to 120, each company will respond differently. You and I know that the reason why the government's trying to focus on how much it might cost to put in a new renewable energy system is that they're trying to distract from the fact they have no climate change policy.


QUESTION: Do you commit to putting both referendums in the first term, even if there isn't bipartisan agreement on them, especially the voice to Parliament, and doesn’t that raise the risk of a seriously damaging, and possibly a no vote as a result, a damaging campaign, that is overwhelmed by politics?
ANSWER: It's so dishonest this debate. It is so dishonest -


QUESTION: You’ve said that there have been no formal negotiations on preferences between Labor and Mr Palmer. But do you concede that Labor did approach him about a preference deal, as he has again confirmed this morning?
ANSWER: Sorry, I didn't pluck that out of nowhere. That was the Paris Agreement. That's what the scientists tell us.


QUESTION: Can you clarify your comments on Sky, did you say there were no conversations with Labor...
ANSWER: I'm not choosing it, the scientists say it. It's what we've got to do to stop the planet getting warmer.


QUESTION: Can you clarify, did you say there were no conversations with Labor powerbrokers at all?
ANSWER: Let's go to Citibank, they're an internationally reputable bank. They say that the consequences in terms of cost, of policies on climate change like ours are immaterial. So I am saying to you very clearly that both in the short term and the long term, the cost of not acting on climate change is far worse than acting on climate change. And, again, let's, when you talk about cost, what's the cost to the environment? The cost is in not acting. When you talk about the cost to business, the reality is, that lots of businesses are so far ahead of government they're already investing. This is the problem with this short-term vacuous government who has no policies in the election other than to say they're not Labor. Australian people and business are so far ahead of the political debate, you must be bored by the Government's rhetoric which simply wants to you know say we can't do this and we can't do that. The rest of the world is so far ahead of us it's embarrassing.


QUESTION: What about legislation? You say they shouldn't be brought into the mainstream. That means that Labor won't deal with them in the next Parliament?
ANSWER: I'd say that my view on this mine is going to be based on the best science, whether or not it stacks up, and if it is, if it stacks up and passes all the scientific tests, I won't engage in sovereign risk. So in other words we won't arbitrarily upend things. But what I'll also say to that woman miner in central Queensland, is that if you're a labour hire miner, not a direct employee, I'll make sure you get paid the same as the direct employee. If you're a casual or on a fixed term contract I'll make sure you get a fairer go.


QUESTION: Could you answer the question?
ANSWER: Okay sure.


QUESTION: If you feel that strongly about him why won't Labor rule out any dealing with Clive Palmer's party should you win the election?
ANSWER: By all means.


QUESTION: Your proposal for a debate at the National Press Club, will that be in prime time and if not, why not?
ANSWER: I think you'd be fair enough to acknowledge that then, Adani didn't get the finance but now they appear to have got the finance. The other thing of course back then is they were talking about a 60 million tonne mine with 10,000 jobs. Now the promises have shrunk to a 10 million tonne mine.


QUESTION: A local question. Is Labor disappointed that Macquarie Point is still sitting idle? [Inaudible] unlike here it has not been activated at all.
ANSWER: In terms of the commercial high jump bar, yeah they've passed that.


QUESTION: Tasmanian Liberals have come out today and said this funding as well as a commitment to push for a Tasmanian AFL team, that these funding commitments are out of touch with the community. What would your response be to that?
ANSWER: Well that's going to be a matter for the state and federal regulators isn't it.


QUESTION: On childcare, Mr Shorten why are you keeping the activity test in place which means that families in which women decide not to work won't get access to this? Previously, Amanda Rishworth has been opposed to the activity test, so why are you keeping it in place, and what's the review of the activity test going to achieve?
ANSWER: I'd say that's wrong. Our position's very clear. Got to stack up commercially. Got to stack up scientifically. Got to stack up according to the law and we won't engage in sovereign risk.


QUESTION: Just to clarify though, Mr Shorten, would you like to see the activity test eventually scrapped following this review?
ANSWER: If we want to talk about conflicting positions, let's be even handed here, Leigh. You have got all these Scott Morrison Liberals down in Melbourne and Sydney, they call themselves "modern Liberals", and you've got the LNP in Queensland with a different view. You have the civil war between Matt Canavan and Josh Frydenberg about where poor old Melissa Price was going to finally...


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you promised a pay rise for childcare workers, why not single out workers in other low paid industries and give them a similar pay rise? If not, could that not open the flood gates for union claims for pay rises in other sectors?
ANSWER: Well he already is and this is the real heart of the issue. When you get an income tax credit, when you haven't paid income tax, it's a gift from the Government.


QUESTION: You have repeated your line that everything is going up except your wages. If most workers in Australia don't get a pay rise, will your first term have been a failure?
ANSWER: It won't have an appreciable impact on the price of housing.


QUESTION: But if you do.
ANSWER: Well what we want to do is create a level playing field, first of all. Why should a pair of first-home buyers, you know supported by their parents, they could be in their late 20s, early 30s. They go to bid for a house, get the deposit together, they've got to look at getting the stamp duty together, it's a lot more expensive than it was 20 years ago. And then what happens is they're bidding against someone in the crowd who is getting a taxpayer subsidy in the form of negative gearing. It's not fair and the other thing is this, this nation can't afford to keep giving away money to property investors to make losses on property. Now we are grandfathering it, though so no-one will be affected who is currently invested under these laws it's prospective.


QUESTION: On preferences, you made your feelings about Clive Palmer very clear. Why is one of your candidates in Tasmania Julie Collins preferences his candidates second?
ANSWER: Well, that's all happened under the current government and that's at the heart of this election. This government loves to talk about a strong economy but strong for who? Corporate profits are up 39 per cent but wages are only up 5 per cent. First-home buyers find it hard to get in the market, but if you're a property investor buying your sixth or seventh property, this Government gives you a subsidy. Is that really fair? I mean the heart of the problem in Australia at the moment is that we don't have any economic confidence. Wages are stagnating, cost of living is going up. What we have is that capital in this country is taxed very lightly but income is taxed very heavily. It's not fair on our young people, it's not fair on our pensioners, it's not fair on people on fixed incomes.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, just on this issue of Clive Palmer, the Newspoll today seems to suggest his popularity is on the rise. If you do win the election next month and Palmer does hold some sort of sway in the Senate, do you think you will be able to negotiate with him and get your agenda through, which is fairly ambitious?
ANSWER: Sorry just to correct, when you say controversial, some in the property industry don't like negative gearing changes but a lot of people actually do like it.


QUESTION: The Northern Territory candidate Wayne Kurnoth has posted some questionable social media posts. How worried are you in the Northern Territory practices that he was pre-selected?
ANSWER: Well, I don't accept your assumption it's less enticing. It's preferentially taxed on the way in. So in other words, the income you pay into superannuation up to a certain level is still taxed below income you take in your daily pay packet. So it is preferentially taxed on the way in and preferentially or more favourably taxed while it's in the superannuation. So I don't accept the characterisation it's less interesting. What has happened though, is we've got to make sure that the function of superannuation is to make sure that people have money for their retirement. It's not about making multimillionaires, multi-multimillionaires is it?


QUESTION: Should the CFMEU be suing Victorian Police for blocking them from inspecting a work site?
ANSWER: Leigh, you know there's no plans for 60 per cent or indeed 50 per cent, but I agree that what we need to do is eventually lighten the burden of income tax across all the levels. But to be fair, we already are offering 3.6 million Australians lower income tax at the bottom end. We've matched, we were ahead of the Government until the last budget and they basically matched our proposal for 10 million wage earners so when it comes to income tax, we are doing what we think is sensible. But the way which we also need to go in this country is not fund tax cuts on the never-never like this government is currently promising in five years’ time and the only way they can fund it is if they cut services. See this is one of the big numbers in this election. Don't worry about what a business has to do in terms of their decisions which they control. This is something Mr Morrison controls.


QUESTION: Can I ask on mining, do you support Tanya's view yesterday, you said that Indian mining companies are not capable of providing jobs in Queensland?
ANSWER: First of all, when it comes to community sector, there was some wage improvement made for them when Labor was last in power. When it comes to aged care, let's see what the Royal Commission does. But there are unique features of the early childhood education industry. First of all, if you look at 96 different occupations in Australia, it ranks 92nd- that's 92nd bottom, not 92nd top.


QUESTION: Not yesterday, the other day. Do you support that and what is your stance on Adani?
ANSWER: That's right.


QUESTION: Just on wages Mr Shorten you said before that childcare workers would be the first. Are we looking at a raft of almost unprecedented government intervention in getting wage rises and will other industries expect it?
ANSWER: No. Let's go to that. First of all, if we agree - and you were generous enough to observe that everyone knows that early childhood educators are both important and underpaid. There's four options we've got. One, we just ask them to keep working for bugger all. Well, I don't think that's an option. So two, we can ask the parents to pay more. I don't think that's an option because child care is already horrendously expensive. In fact, we're going to provide $2,000 per family, in some cases $1,500 per-family per-child and others. But the parents shouldn't be asked to necessarily pay the whole tariff, should they? We could ask the providers and it's a hybrid industry; there's not-for-profit and for-profit operators but they're operating on increasingly tight margins. Or, the alternative is the Government recognises this is an important sector, it recognises that we shouldn't be asking parents to pay more. So we should be able to find some scarce resources to help pay the adults who are educating our kids, who have been sorely neglected. Now, this is not our wages policy for everyone else. You said, why this sector and what will you do for everyone else? There are plenty of levers if you're a fair dinkum government where we can help have real change to help working people get back on top.


QUESTION: It's not isolated though.
ANSWER: No, that wouldn't be right. What we want to do is have real change, because, frankly, more of the same under this government isn't good enough for Australians -


QUESTION: On your climate change policy, you have said that it's impossible to price and you have also quoted research saying it would have the same economic impact as the Coalition's policy. Let's put all this to rest, why couldn't you have costed this with the PBO before the election, just like you did your negative gearing policy? And they could have taken into account the cost of climate change, which you've said is over $10 billion, you've quoted a figure on that as well.	ANSWER: Perhaps if you bear with me for a moment, I'll
answer your question.


QUESTION: Will you be extending the childcare wage subsidy to other industries and if not, why did you say yesterday that childcare would be the first sector?
ANSWER: No, no, hang on, Leigh. You keep characterising my policies -


QUESTION: Will you review the RBA's target rate for inflation if you win the election?	ANSWER: Well, I want to try and
answer -


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've just described the recent inflation number unless I’m wrong as alarming.
ANSWER: A fair go for all. We're going to invest in people and invest in infrastructure. You ask, you want - let's not dumb politics down to six second sound bites, that's what annoys people. I'll tell you what we will do - I'll give you as quick as possibly I can. We're going to have real change because more of the same isn't good enough. We're going to get wages moving again. We're going to take real action on climate change. We're going to look after three million pensioners and Commonwealth Senior Health Card holders with dental care, we're going to provide a million Australian families with better support child care then they are getting. And we're going to end the chaos. One topic we haven't talked about tonight is the lurch to the right by the current Government.


QUESTION: Well, tell me if I'm taking you out of context here because I wanted to get a sense of how much peril you believe the Australian economy is in when inflation is flat-lining. Just how bad is it?
ANSWER: Ok, but I'm happy to contribute, though.


QUESTION: Can I ask you your reaction to Steve Dickson resigning from One Nation over the strip club incident.
ANSWER: That's alright.


QUESTION: On wages, what about aged care workers, don't they deserve a pay increase as well and can you promise that to that industry?
ANSWER: Well, fair's fair. In the six years that the current government have been in, Labor has been united. I have got a tremendously talented Shadow Cabinet. People can also trust us because we're actually not hiding our policies. You said in your introduction that Labor -  I think Laura Tingle did, sorry. She said Labor is putting forward a big agenda. Well, we are. We believe that if we want the Australian people to trust us, we have to trust them and tell them what we're going to do.


QUESTION: Which childcare workers will get the pay increase, will it be all of them?
ANSWER: Leigh, let's see how we go in the election first. We haven't won and we haven't lost. But one thing's for sure. In the event we do win, we have put our policies to the people beforehand. What business tell me, what families tell me, what small business, what farmers tell me is that they're sick of surprises. What we are doing is we are putting our policies before the election to the people. So even though people use the word mandate quite casually in politics, I genuinely believe we will have a mandate and we'll do our best to convince the Senate. I mean, one thing I should say is that seeing the profusion of small and cranky parties in the Senate, I do think people should vote the same way in the Senate as they do in the House. What we don't want is instability. People are sick and tired of us politicians always being at each other's throats. What they want to see is us putting the people first. So what we're doing is putting people at the centre of all of our decisions.


QUESTION: On the economy and interest rates, if the Reserve Bank decides to reduce interest rates next  month, a rate reduction during the height of an election campaign, what do you think that that says about the economy?
ANSWER: Thanks for the conversation, Leigh. It was great.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, on religious freedom what do you say to schools like this one about your promise to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to stop them from choosing the teachers of religious faith that they want to and also what do you say to Mr Morrison about that issue.
ANSWER: Will you know this fellow and his report remind me of the doctors that the big tobacco companies used to roll out in the 70s and 80s to say that smoking was healthy for you. We will file this report under P for propaganda. It's full of wrong assumptions. But there's a deeper issue here and I'll get Mark to supplement in a moment. When are we finally going to put the genie of the scare campaign back in the bottle on climate change? Australian politics is broken because we haven't actually dealt with climate change properly. Carbon pollution is increasing under this government. The report itself - and I haven't read it but I've seen the initial observations of it - it actually says they haven't modelled the impact of climate change and not doing anything. This is such a flagrantly dishonest debate at the moment. We are very committed to taking real action on climate change. We don't believe the scary numbers. We think they're just rubbish. And also who paid for this report? I don't know if you’ve found out, but who actually paid for this report? Was it right wing think tank the Menzies Research Centre who has current Liberal MPs on the board, former Liberal MPs on the board, former heads of the Business Council and the Mining Council and mining interests? What Sydney businessmen have helped contribute to pay for this report? When you get a report like this you've always got to ask yourself who paid for it? And is this for politics or is it about climate change? I might get Mike to talk a bit further.


QUESTION: Do we need a religious discrimination Act in Australia.
ANSWER: It shows that if you write a fairy tale you'll get a report for this Government on climate change and I just don't believe it. We've got to call out the scare campaigns. We've got to call out - ask yourself, and I say to Australians who hear the scary numbers coming from private vested interest commissioned reports, why do these people want you not to take action on climate change? What are they so scared of? You know you want to hear some real modelling, come with me to Sun Metal in Townsville where they've got a solar farm which is helping provide cheap energy, which keeps the refinery going. Come with me to Whyalla and see the solar farm there which is powering 3,000 houses. If you want to see the real lived experience taking action on climate change, next time you'll land in a plane over the suburbs of Australia have a look and count the number of houses where you see solar panels on the roof. People, we've got to call out the superstition. We've got to call out the fear. The problem is that this government after six years is incapable of lowering your energy prices and incapable of doing anything on climate change. They're split down the middle. We see the tendrils of influence of the right wing extremists within the Liberal Party and the National Party. For whatever reason they've got them stuck in the cul de sac of history. They don't want to move on climate change. But it wouldn't matter except they're the Government of Australia. The reason why families are paying more in electricity prices right now because this government can't move forward on energy policy. The reason why we're handing on a more polluted environment to our kids is because this government can't change its ways. We need real change in Australia. We need to get the energy prices down. We need to unlock the potential of this company and 10,000 companies like it to export to the rest of the world. We need to do more on climate change. Here's a prediction and I think it makes pretty good sense. Three more years of this government like the last six, it'll be even more expensive to fix up the damage of climate change in three years if we don't start now.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten on today's announcement Brian Fisher has modelled the economic cost of your climate change policy. Between $260 and $540 billion. If you say that's wrong why don't you provide your own costings then?
ANSWER: No. No, no, no Tim, wrong. First of all,  I'll tell you who's on our side of the ledger. Just about every scientist in the world. APRA, the RBA, Citibank. Citibank is not a nest of communists although the way this government's going they probably will call them that soon. They have to write a note for the market, for their clients. It has to be up to an ASX level of compliance. Citibank doesn't have any skin in the game whether Liberal or Labor win the next election. It's not a biased, you know opinion for rent that we're seeing in this latest report. They're just telling it straight. And again let me return to the lived experience of Australians. What we've seen in the last six years under the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison-Palmer-Hanson Government is we're seeing power prices have gone up. That's just a fact. You don't need an expert. Just go and ask anyone who pays electricity in this country. Now it would be the triumph of hope over experience to give these climate denying cave dwellers another three years in business when they clearly failed in the last six years. Labor's got a real choice for change. When people go and vote between now and the election on May the 18th, there is a real choice. If you're happy that your power bills are going up, if you're happy that nothing's happening on climate change except more carbon is being polluted, if you're happy to miss out on renewable energy jobs then you probably like more of the same. But if you think that politics is broken, if you think the climate deniers need a good kick up the back pants, just a good kick up the backside to just get on and do something, vote Labor at the next election.


QUESTION: Whether you believe the figures that are in the report or not doesn't it show that the numbers can still be crunched and it's not actually impossible to get a figure?
ANSWER: No, I don't think we will actually. I think more people - and I was at the debate too - I think more people actually were unhappy that the government is not advocating anything serious on climate change. Now I get that in the election - and this is why you in the media play such an important role interpreting what you hear, reporting what you hear - I get that the government is trying to, is doing a cyclonic scare campaign on climate change. But I actually think the people of Australia are a bit over being told to be scared of the future. If this government finds the future too hard they should get out of the way and have a government who is not scared of the future. The reality is the single greatest reason why energy prices have gone up in Australia is there's just a lack of energy policy. And anyone who thinks this government after 13 energy policies is miraculously going to fix their internal chaos and division, you know they're dreaming as they say.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten you implore Australians to accept the outcome of experts with regard to whether the Adani mine should go ahead or not. You now have an expert giving a mixed finding on your climate plan and you tipping a bucket on them from a great height. Why shouldn't Australians conclude you're cherry picking you experts?
ANSWER: Well Mark is here and he can speak for himself. But remember, international permits, we've heard the scare campaign from the government. They think it's a bad idea. They just forgot to check with the Business Council and all the other employer groups that say it's a good idea. We believe in least cost abatement, but Mark can explain what he said.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten I spoke to a couple of the audience members after the debate on Monday. They were undecided over the costs of your climate policies. So by not releasing your own modelling are you willing to lose voters over it?	ANSWER: Mark's champing at the bit to answer this. I'll just go first though. First of all in your question you recognise the lie that the government have been saying. Because the government said - I think they let poor old Michaela Cash loose out of witness protection for a moment, then they realised that mistake and put her back under watch. But I think she said we're going to take your utes off people. The Australian newspaper has now confirmed that we're not going to mandatorily take people's utes off them, so I thank you for clearing that up. So let's go to the bigger issue. But in all seriousness we saw the government run that scare campaign remember? That you know you're going to lose your ute. I mean what rubbish - rubbish, rubbish, rubbish. Now in terms of EVs we have said that we want to put in charger stations so people in the bush can also access new technology. We've also said that in government purchasing that we would like to start orienting the purchase of the car fleet to electric vehicles. But I might get Mark to further
answer this.


QUESTION: Mr Butler said this morning there will probably be a limit on the number or proportion of international credits that will be allowed to reduce emissions in Australia under your scheme. What will that limit be? Will it be more than 50 per cent, more than 75 per cent? Should voters have a right to know approximately a ballpark figure about what that would be? Because it will have an influence on the overall cost.	ANSWER: No. Listen, no, the short answer - no. The longer
answer is this. Our early childhood educators are underpaid. They are the first adults to which we entrust our kids outside the family unit. Did you know that out of 96 occupations childcare workers childhood, early childhood educators, their pay level comes in at 92? That's hopeless. Another fact which I'm going to keep banging on about is that 96 per cent of the industry are women. If it was an industry which is 96 per cent men it wouldn't be as low paid. So what we have looked at is what are the options to give these important people a better go. Ask any parent. Some of you or maybe some of you have got family who are early childhood educators, there is plenty of them in Australia. We know they're underpaid, so what's the solution? You either just let them be underpaid. Well that's intolerable isn't it? Why should we rely on a bunch of workers to sacrifice themselves just so the rest of us can have, not pay these people what they're meant to. The second option is, of course, you could ask parents to pay a lot more. But under this government childcare has been such a debacle, hasn't it? Childcare costs have gone up and up and up. So that's not an option to ask parents to pay more. You could ask all of the not for profit and for profit providers just to miraculously find the money in the system, but it's not there. So we've come up with the best option. Which is we will help contribute to the wages of early childhood educators. It won't be allocated based on their industrial instruments or enterprise agreements or union membership. So that's another Government scare campaign we can put in the bin along with the utes and the rest of the stuff they come up with. But it really comes down to this and this is really what I want to address my remarks to the Australian people. Child care is important. A lot of two income families a lot of women returning to work are caught in a vicious cycle where they've got to go to work to pay for the childcare. But the childcare is so expensive that really they're working for nothing. So what we've come up with is I think a pretty neat solution which gives a fair go to a million Australian households. Specifically, if you earn up to $68,000 in your household we'll pay for 100 per cent of the childcare. If you earn between $68,000 and $100,000 we'll pay up to 85 per cent. If you earn between $100,000 and $174,000 as total household income we'll contribute between 85 and 60 per cent subsidy. What this means practically, and when people go to make a choice to vote between now and the election, what it means is that if you've got two kids in childcare, say your household incomes around 100K or maybe just a bit north of it, what you'll be getting is in excess of $3,000 childcare fee relief. When you add that on top of what we're doing with lowering people's taxes, about 5K extra a year. This is how we get a strong economy working for middle and working class people. And I don't think anyone seriously thinks we shouldn't give early childhood educators a better deal. It's all about priorities isn't it. This government wants to give $77 billion to the top three per cent of income earners. I'd just like to give a better pay rise to 140,000 [100,000] childcare workers.


QUESTION: On electrical car policy you've got no policy that actually... the 50 per cent target except for rolling out chargers... So would you be willing to intervene in the market for subsidies if it turns out that [inaudible] or is it just going to be a let's wait and see thing. And is your renewables target similarly aspirational just like your electric car targets?
ANSWER: Yeah, I will. I think it's a good policy and we can match it. We can also match it because frankly we're making the reform decisions about winding back unsustainable subsidies at the top end. This is the way politics should be. I'm not a hater. This government will only ever have bad things to say about Labor. I adopt a different view. It's not about me, Mr Morrison, Labor or Liberal exclusively. It's about what I'm going to do for you, Australian families, Australian voters, Australians who need to use our health care system. So yep, tick. But what I would like Mr Morrison to do is match me on pension and dental care. What we're going to do is provide 2.6 million pensioners, who always get forgotten in elections, nearly 400,000 Commonwealth seniors health card holders - so 3 million people in all, we're going to provide for the first time, nationally across the board a voucher under Medicare $1,000 dollars bulk billed to contribute towards their dental care every two years. See the difference is I can afford to match a good health idea from the government because health's my number one priority. But he can't match my good ideas for pensioners and health because he's too busy defending properties, you know subsidies for the people buying their fifth and sixth property and being a soft touch on multinationals.


QUESTION: If you're not getting to that target though, would you be prepared intervene with subsidies.
ANSWER: No, I don't think that is accurate. I haven't seen their costings. We'll release all our costings before the election. But as I understand in the first four years in terms of the help we're going to give early childhood educators it's about $550 million and in terms of what we're doing for childcare relief for Australian families that's about $4 billion. Again, you know when this government says we can't afford to look after childcare subsidies what they're saying to a million Australian families is you don't deserve it. When this government says we can't afford to look after early childhood educators and pay them properly, what they're saying to them is you don't deserve it. This is a government who for the last three years could find $80 billion to give away to big business. This is a government who could find $77 billion dollars - even they haven't told us how they're going to pay for it, the tricky little roosters - in terms of tax cuts for the top end. But when it comes to early childhood educators, "Oh, we don't have the money." When it comes to better subsidies for childcare for a million Aussie households, "Don't bother us, we don't have the money." Why is it this government says to millions of everyday people, to the pensioners with dental care, we can't afford that. What they're really saying is you don't deserve it.


QUESTION: Childcare, Mr Shorten. Will your pay rise, will people need to be on an EA to get that pay rise and will they need to be a member of the union?
ANSWER: No. What I say actually is that if we leave the problem of climate change any longer it's going to cost more to fix it. But I'll let Mark have the last word because he's been doing such a good job on our policy.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison today has announced a couple of hundred million dollars towards the PBS threshold to give patients that need medication free sooner, is that a good policy and will you match it?
ANSWER: Guys the factory is going to need to get back to work but it's been good fun. Thank you.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Can I just ask also on childcare, just following up on from Chris. Do you know you know the annual cost or the ongoing annual cost of your childcare policy? After this initial eight year period the government has costed it as and it's in today's Herald and Age at about $1.6 billion. Is that accurate?
ANSWER: Thanks. That was Nadia Clancy, running in a David and Goliath struggle in Boothby. Labor hasn't won Boothby since 1943 but Nadia Clancy is making this a real competition for the voters of Boothby. That is what elections should be actually they should be about the future. And that means that this election is all about climate change. When we talk to the children here, the politicians of Australia really need to do more to protect the future of our kids. There is no clearer test about the future than climate change. Only Labor has got a real plan to take action on climate change. We want to get on and start fixing the problems so we can hand on a better deal for our children's future. Contrast this with the complete chaos and division of the last six years of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government. What we have seen is complete chaos in the ranks of the government. The reason why Malcolm Turnbull couldn't get anything done on climate change is because he was held to ransom by Peter Dutton and Tony Abbott and the right wing of the Liberal Party. But, there is an even bigger problem looming. Mr Morrison has managed to take himself hostage to Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. We can't afford to have another three years of inaction on climate change, our kids deserve better. I would now like to hand over to Tanya Plibersek and we will talk a bit more about all the exciting things Labor is going to do to help kids in the future.


QUESTION: Just putting aside the Fisher report for a moment do you accept as a basic principle that your more ambitious emission reduction total will come with a higher cost to the economy.
ANSWER: Good afternoon, everyone. Before we start, I'm happy to take questions in this case from the local media. We've had a national press conference. I'm here today to announce that because of Ross Hart's advocacy, supported by Brian Mitchell, a Labor government, if we're elected on May 18, will invest $7 million into the Royal Flying Doctor Service here in Tasmania. Just a little bit of background of what the RFDS does in Tassie. As you'd be aware the Royal Flying Doctor Service celebrated its 90th anniversary last year and they've been in Tassie now since 1960. They perform a very important function in terms of healthcare in Tassie. From the Bass Strait islands to the more remote communities. People should realise that whilst Tasmania geographically is not as large as some of the mainland states there are a lot of remote locations. The RFDS has been an important part of providing proper healthcare in this area. But it needs some more money. It needs to be properly integrated into the health system which Tasmanians receive elsewhere. So this $7 million will go to upgrading the hangar facilities. It will go towards providing better mental health, better dental health, better support of a whole range of local government areas. This $7 million courtesy of Ross Hart's advocacy is part of Labor's ongoing commitment to make sure that Tasmanians enjoy the same quality of healthcare in Tasmania that people on the mainland enjoy. Over to some local questions.


QUESTION: Tanya can I just ask do you as an MP in Sydney do you feel any sympathy for Tony Abbott having faced the defacing of his... clearly not.
ANSWER: First of all, isn't this great to be at MONA. And it’s great to be here with David and Kirsha and the workforce here. MONA is just... MONA is simply fun. Now I was saying to David as we walked down here “You know, is this world's best?” and he said “No, it's just fun.” But actually, I think that David is being a bit modest. Tasmanian tourism, with the flagship which is MONA, is not only leading in Australia, it's leading throughout the world. And it is fun. But what Labor wants to do, is we want to back in the future of Tasmanian tourism, and we want to back in the investment which has been made by private investors in MONA. Chloe and I came here for a 45th birthday last year with friends. It is a fabulous centrepiece of a visit to southern Tasmania. And when you think about MONA, it really is excellent and fun across the world. Paris may have the Louvre, you know you've got the Guggenheim, you've got other great international exhibits, but Australia, not just Tasmania, has got the MONA. This is fabulous. But the money which has been invested here has been all private inspiration. There's been no national support for a facility which is employing hundreds of people, and bringing, you know, tens and tens of thousands of tourists, not just to Tasmania, but to Australia. So I'm really pleased to announce, in part through the hard work of our tourism spokesperson, Anthony Albanese, and our Tasmanian Labor team, spearheaded by Julie Collins, that a Labor government if elected on May 18 will invest an additional $50 million in MONA, as part of a $120 million tourism package. The Tasmanian economy has many strings to its bow. But tourism is certainly, I think, one of the great job generators for Tasmania. Tasmanian tourism is famous across the mainland and famous across the world. If you've got people who are willing to back themselves and invest in such a marvellous facility and experience, then they need a government in Canberra as committed to Tasmania, as committed to tourism, as committed to fun, as the people here are. I'd now like to get Albo to talk further about the whole package of tourism announcements at this fabulous facility.


QUESTION: There's not much left except to say do you feel sympathy for Tony Abbott given his posters have been defaced in the way that they've been defaced.
ANSWER: Great to be on your show.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can we ask you about your thoughts on the news that one of the Sri Lankan bombers appears to have studied in Australia?
ANSWER: Thanks, Melita. I want to thank Good Start too and it's great to be back in Perth with Tanya Plibersek. Tonight is debate night - I'm really looking forward to a positive debate, outlining competing visions for what we can do to help the Australian people. But it is all about choices. Today I make very clear that the Labor Party chooses to look after the childcare costs of a million Australian households rather than unsustainable tax loopholes at the top end of town. It's all about a choice. A choice between a united, stable Labor team, led by myself, supported by my Deputy Leader Tanya Plibersek and Melita Markey here or the divided ramshackle coalition of the unwilling, led by Mr Morrison, and Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. This is a very unstable coalition of cuts and chaos in Canberra and it needs to stop. But Labor is not just focused on them. As I said, we have got exciting offerings to help Australian families with the cost of childcare. I was really pleased yesterday in Melbourne to announce that because of the serious economic decisions we've made, we can afford to provide the single best improvement assisting families, Australian households with the cost of their childcare in many years. We are saying to Australian families, whose household incomes are up to $174,000, that we will help improve the subsidy that you receive to help you pay the cost of your childcare. Effectively, this will mean between about a $2100 per family to about $1400 per family at the upper end. This is really good news, because why should women have to go to work, earn all the money, just to see it all end up in childcare costs. We've also announced the single most significant improvement to early childhood educators' wages. The system is failing. Early childhood educators are the first adults to which we trust our kids, and yet they are underpaid. The parents know it, the community knows it, everybody knows it. We also propose putting in measures to control prices. We don't want to look after families and the early childhood educators to see the fees miraculously increase by the amount which we're providing to support the teachers and to support the parents. I just want to close on reminding everyone that yesterday as well, it wasn't just good news for Australian families. It was good news for pensioners. I've already been inundated by pensioners since our announcement who say every election there's nothing for the pensioners. Well, that stops today. We are saying to 2.6 million aged pensioners, to over 380,000 people on the Commonwealth health seniors card, that we want to help you with the cost of your dental care. There's 185,000 people right now, older Australians, putting off getting dental care because it's too expensive. Well, Labor has got a proposition for every pensioner in Australia, that when you need health with your teeth, and your oral hygiene is so important to your health generally, we'll be there. We're going to create new support within our Medicare system so that every two years, pensioners, three million of them, will get an additional $1000 to help with the cost of going to see the dentist. Labor is in touch with middle class, working class people and people on the pension. We understand that if we can help with the cost of child care, if we can help with the early childhood educators, if we can help keep prices down generally and we can help with pensioners, then millions of Australians are going to be better off if they vote Labor on May 18.  I'd now like to hand over to Tanya to talk a bit more about our exciting vision for restoring the fair go for millions of Australians.


QUESTION: Just quickly, how do you reflect on the fact that this seems to be the new-norm, that you've got an ANZAC Day service and ANZAC Day services that are under threat from alleged extremists and Islamists?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody, it's great to be here at a great Catholic primary school, doing great things for the kids and doing a great job actually for Australia. Now Tanya and I and Mark Butler are here visiting with Hannah and we're pleased to say that a Labor government, if it gets elected on May the 18th, is going to invest a billion dollars to help make our schools solar schools. Four thousand schools will benefit from an upgrade, or indeed the introduction of new technology, to get their power bills down, and to also make sure we're doing more on climate change. These are very sensible proposals  which are going to help schools with the cost of living challenges, which are going to help provide power into the grid and means that we can do something proper on climate change. In terms of where we go on this, what the government's - what we will do as the government is we will work with both government and non-government schools to roll out this program. What I'd like to do now is to ask Tanya to talk further about this program and also Mark Butler.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, your candidate for McPherson, has said during the campaign that Labor is committed to reviewing the Adani - the federal approvals for Adani. Belinda Hassan, the candidate for Dawson, has said that twice now, that Labor may review it. Why are your candidates under the impression that you're committed to a review?	ANSWER: Thanks very much Justine. Good morning everybody. Australia needs a change of government. This country can't keep going along as we are without taking real action on climate change. We see the power prices going up and up. We're missing out on renewable jobs of the future and we're squibbing the hard decisions to give a better environment to our kids. So today's announcement is all about further investment by Labor into real action on climate change and we want to prepare for the workforce of the future. We're going to invest in more renewable energy jobs with the skills. As I walked around this very clever workshop seeing the bespoke work which is being done here
answering manufacturing challenges here and also exporting to other countries. Courageous companies like this and hard working workforces and families in north and north west Tassie need a government as innovative, as bold and as focused on the future. This company is getting ahead because it's thinking about the future not the past. But this company deserves a government in Canberra who's thinking about the future not the past. Climate change is one of the big issues in this election. We've got to get our power prices down. We've got to start training our young people and not so young people to grab the job opportunities of the future that renewable energy provides. And for goodness sakes, the future generations aren't going to forgive the current crop of politicians if we don't take real action on climate change right now. I'd like to hand over to Mark Butler to talk a little bit more about a couple of our announcements, then let's talk some more.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the worker who approached you yesterday in Gladstone, earning $250,000 –
ANSWER: Listen, today is not a day for politics. We don't know much more than what we've heard on the news. I think today, I'd like to confine my remarks to ANZAC Day. And of course, just encourage Australians who have family members travelling, check with the DFAT, check with your family, but we've just got to proceed with caution and care.


QUESTION: Good money.
ANSWER: I think that Australians can make a choice about the world. We can make a choice that it's too scary, we should never leave home, that it is too confronting and too difficult to navigate. I don't have that view. Just because there are terrorists in the world, we can't let them win by discouraging our young people from travelling. I've got teenagers, they're not quite at the age of travelling overseas, but I imagine in the next couple of years they will. I hope they do. We're going to try and teach them to be as careful as they can. But Anzac Day, as I said, is a sacred day. We can't afford to let these extremists discourage us. On the other hand, we've got to maintain the utmost care. And that's why I for one, am grateful that we live in a country with such capable security services, police services and Defence services.


QUESTION: Yeah. Well wouldn't it have been straightforward and honest of you to say to him, you're going to deny him a tax cut that the Government is offering, and increase his taxes by 2 per cent.
ANSWER: I have made it clear that we have no plans to review it. Our position is that the deals have to stack up commercially. We'll be guided by the best science. I'm going to implement the law of the land. No more, no less and of course, we're not going to engage in sovereign risk.


QUESTION: To be fair, what you said to him yesterday was that you would look at it. As somebody who is weeks away from the election and your shadow minister this morning told us that you were just being courteous to this worker by saying that. Is it more than being courteous, is it being misleading given we're this close to election?
ANSWER: Good money.


QUESTION: On water buybacks, Labor's position is for a Commission of Inquiry?
ANSWER: Union - union contract, just saying.


QUESTION: Why not a Royal Commission? Is it an acknowledgement that there have been too many Royal Commissions, there's some creep going on in that space?
ANSWER: No Mark, that isn't the conversation. What I said is that I understood his point of view. He's frustrated, he does a lot of overtime, and he wants to make sure that he's making ends meet. What I have made very clear, on many occasions, is that in 2022-2023, we will remove the Budget repair levy. So that's when the Budget will be in a proper surplus, and sustainable. So absolutely, I can say to people, that we get that everybody feels they're paying too much income tax in this country, but it's a matter of priorities. I have said, and I don't often do this, but you know they publish me correctly - but in The Australian - six months ago they reported me as saying exactly what I was saying yesterday. That in fact, we would like to lower income taxes for everybody, but you have got to do it when it's sustainable. The other point I made to that worker is that this government's tax cuts are on the never-never. Like, why is Mr Morrison ducking and weaving and not saying how much he's going to give away to the top two or three percent? I understand the number is $77 billion. But that - no one in the government is willing to own up to the fact that they want to give an $11,000 - an annual tax cut, to millionaires, and $11 a week to most people. And what this government won't do, is not only have they been caught out shovelling truck loads of money to the top end, but they won't say how they're going to pay for it. What I won't say to workers, is that I'll give you a tax cut and then cut your hospitals and your schools at the same time. Labor has got a sensible plan, well funded. The big problem in this country is that capital in this country is taxed lightly, and income is taxed heavily. You know, on your capital gains tax, you get half of that tax free. If you own the shares, and the dividends, you get a 30 per cent gift from the government. Capital is taxed lightly, but income earners, top right down to the bottom, and there's many more at the bottom in this country, they don't get a fair deal from this Government.


QUESTION: At a recent WeChat Q&A, you avoided answering questions about Huawei, Chinese interference and negative views of the Chinese Communist Party in Australia. Was that a case of self-censoring to meet the WeChat and Communist Party rules?	ANSWER: Sorry I’m just going to, we have said on the record in The Australian newspaper that we would like to do more on tax. I don't blame you if you missed it but the point is we’ve also said on the Budget repair levy, that 2 per cent, that we would like to remove it in 2022-23. I've been up front, up front six months ago, up front yesterday, up front today. But where is Mr Morrison? Why won't he be up front?) No, let's get to this. I'm not going to let him run around the country taking his happy pills and having his little photos and getting away with serious scrutiny. You know, the Prime Minister's job isn't to be the court jester, it’s to be the man with the plan with the answers. I’ve got the plan and I’ve got the
answers.


QUESTION: You’ve said that there'll be no review of the Adani project. Could you be precise? What are you talking about? There’ll be no review of the recent groundwater decision, there’ll be no review of the project, there’ll be no review of any environmental approval that's already been undertaken, what do you mean by that?
ANSWER: Yep.


QUESTION: But do you have a plan to review the recent groundwater management decision which Tony Burke and many of your spokespeople have indicated that, have built the case basically for a review by saying that Melissa Price was bullied into that decision. Do you mean you will not review that decision?	ANSWER: This is an acknowledgement that there's something very suspicious about the water buybacks conducted under this government. This is an acknowledgement that there are questions to
answer. We have taken a methodical approach to this unfolding scandal. We contacted the Department of Agriculture, we asked them to provide us with documents, a series of documents. Guess what? Time came for the documents to be provided, time went, no documents. We think a Commission of Inquiry has the powers of a Royal Commission. It's set up under the Royal Commission Act 1902. But we don't think this should be an inordinately long inquiry or an inordinately expensive inquiry but the people are owed the truth. This is one of the many reasons why I'm also backing a national Anti-Corruption Commission because under this government there is too much dodgy behaviour when it comes to money and the Government and the Ministers. For example, you have the Paladin contract. We all know that's been desperately swept under the carpet. We know that you’ve got the ongoing saga which is Hello World. And now you’ve got Eastern Agricultural Services. There is a pattern of events with this government which goes to a very fundamental question about their honesty in administering money and a Commission of Inquiry is exactly the right way to go.


QUESTION: You’ve got one candidate saying that there will be a review of Adani, another saying hand on heart there won't be, and you say there are no plans to. Do you concede that your messaging on this issue is inconsistent?	ANSWER: No, not at all. First of all, the questions which came in came in on a range of matters and I
answered the questions that were put to me by the interpreters in the room. But let me make my view clear. On Huawei, and I have said it plenty of times, I'll take the national security advice. When it comes to taking foreign donations, we led and the Government followed. So our view’s very clear. What I’ve also said though about our relations with China is they shouldn't be viewed through the strategic prism of disaster. In other words, you've got to reach out and deal with the Chinese Government not just in the sort of worst case scenario strategic threat, but as economic opportunity and as a country we've had so many exchanges between people to people, business to business. Sorry, hang on. Sorry Dan I’m going to share the questions. Do you know I haven't given a single question yet to a woman journalist? And I'm going to do that.


QUESTION: What do you think of the ad by GetUp that showed Tony Abbott as a lifeguard allowing people to drown and what do you think of GetUp itself as an organisation you helped set up?	ANSWER: The question which I
answered, the question which I was asked was do you have any plans to review Adani. I say I have no plans to review Adani, full stop.


QUESTION: You say your position is consistent but Labor's message as a party isn't consistent, don't voters deserve to know what you actually... (inaudible)
ANSWER: Melissa Price, there’s a name you don't often hear in federal politics. She’s the Environment Minister. Let's get her out of witness protection to explain was she was bullied or not, but I go back to your other question, we have no plans to review the Adani approvals.


QUESTION: Why were they under that impression Mr Shorten surely that would indicate that they are getting that messaging from campaign headquarters or out of your office if they're saying Labor is committed to reviewing these latest approvals by Melissa Price.
ANSWER: No I concede my messaging on it is entirely consistent. If we want to talk about candidates, have you guys met this number three LNP candidate in Queensland, the guy who thinks that three year old child care is a Labor conspiracy? Or have you met their candidate in Melbourne Ports who just clearly says, much prefers private schools to government schools? If you want to look at erratic candidates, why on earth is Mr Morrison not accounting - does he agree with candidate X or candidate Y? In terms of my own candidate, I have good candidates, they're working very hard, I couldn't be happier.


QUESTION: Greg that dog's not going to hunt mate. Let me just answer the question. That dog's not going to hunt. A scare campaign. I’ll be saying that we are not going to review Adani, full stop. We have no plans.
ANSWER: I think it's a really stupid ad. I think it’s grossly disrespectful to 150,000 surf lifesavers. In terms of GetUp they're independent from us. Some of the stuff they say I haven't agreed with, some of the stuff in the past I have. But this ad – well out of line. You can have your disagreements with Tony Abbott but I respect the fact that he's a surf lifesaver.


QUESTION: You're saying your position is consistent but on the consistency of your position in the past year you've said you're against Adani.
ANSWER: My backbenchers have got plenty of views, that's life. We don't run a dictatorship. Cathy O'Toole is a north Queenslander first and foremost, she's got a very clear position. But at the end of the day, the Labor Cabinet will make the decisions and we have no plans to review Adani.


QUESTION: Well I can give you the quote if you like?
ANSWER: No I haven't.


QUESTION: You said that you were … sceptical …
ANSWER: Go ahead.


QUESTION: … of the commercial pace for Adani …
ANSWER: I’ve said I was sceptical of it and I was ...


QUESTION: … and you said that you don't like it, so do you remain sceptical of the commercial pace? Do you like it now? What is your position just for consistency’s sake?
ANSWER: I’ve said that I was sceptical of it …


QUESTION: Mr Shorten you made a virtue throughout this campaign of saying let's be honest, let's be upfront with people. When the man asked you yesterday for a tax cut, why weren't you honest with him and simply said we are going to tax you more?
ANSWER: I have said that I was sceptical of it because they missed so many deadlines. Now they have filled some of those deadlines. When I said I was sceptical of it, that’s because they've had more false starts than a horse race. Hang on, the reality is they seem to have found their commercial finance so that’s that. But in terms of the science, the law, sovereign risk - we will be governed by the law. That has been our position.


QUESTION: But you're not, you're going to tax him two per cent more, debt levy.
ANSWER: Because we are actually going to reduce...


QUESTION: Mr Shorten when you were in Darwin you were asked a story around that, Labor ruling out tax cuts and tax relief for people earning over $90,000 in preference of that going to essential services like schools and hospitals. This gentleman was asking about people on $250,000, so very much up there in terms of income earning. If this man goes into the election on May 18 voting for Labor because you've told him you will look at tax cuts for people like him, like his colleagues on similar earnings, has he been misled and is he voting for a different Labor Party than he thinks he is?
ANSWER: Sorry, just go back to that. I was very clear that I understand why people who are income earners in this country think they are paying too much tax. We have got a plan to take the Budget repair surplus of the Budget repair levy off when the Budget gets to 1 per cent surplus under a Labor Government, which is 2022- 2023. But I also concluded my conversation by saying that the current fellow is promising you a tax cut but he is not explaining how he pays for it. You and I both know, in fact we all here know, Mr Morrison hasn't owned up that he is going to give $77 billion to the top 2 or 3 per cent and he hasn't said how he is going to pay for it. The Australia Institute belled the cat when it said that it would be up to $40 billion worth of cuts. The only way this fellow can sustain any promises is he has to get re-elected twice and then he has to do so by cutting services like schools and hospitals. That is not the way we will do tax reform. What we will do on tax reform is look after the vast bulk of people and as you all know, for those of you who heard what I said in 2018 in our Budget reply, we had bigger, better, fairer tax cuts. Now the Government has caught up and so we have matched them there. But when it comes to tax reform we will do it but we will not do it on the basis of cutting schools and hospitals.


QUESTION: How did you not you say this to the gentleman yesterday?
ANSWER: No we've actually said previously, and you can go to The Australian newspaper six months ago, we said quite a bit that we will take off the Budget repair levy in 22-23. Beyond that, we said that when we can afford to lower income taxes in this country we will. But what we won't do is rob Peter to pay Paul. What we won't do is deny three and four-year-olds universal kindergarten because of unfunded tax cuts to the top end.


QUESTION: Do you believe that nationalising coal fired power stations and energy generators generally is a good idea?
ANSWER: We had a brief interchange.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, inflation has come out today at zero per cent, below expectations. What does that mean for the economy?
ANSWER: I have seen the latest government comment. This is a Coalition in complete climate chaos. They are completely divided. The only chance of real action on climate change, the only chance of lower energy prices sustainably in the long run is voting Labor on May 18.


QUESTION: Just on WeChat, why is your account registered to an unidentified man in Shandong province and are you comfortable with subjecting yourself to the political censorship that goes with that platform?
ANSWER: That just shows you this is an economy with - zero per cent is a problem. It's actually below what the Reserve Bank forecasts is good. If there's no inflation in this quarter, that tells you this is an economy running on empty. It shows you that people have stopped spending money and do you know why they have stopped spending money? Because wages aren't moving. That is not a healthy number. What that means is that we are going down and down and down. Do not be fooled. When an economy is shrinking or when it has that sort of number, that's not what the Reserve Bank thinks is good monetary outcomes or good monetary policy for the nation. What it tells me is this nation's growth is very fragile. What it shows me is that this Government's budget is already in disarray. What it shows me is that people are closing their wallets and purses because they are spending household savings just to make ends meet.


QUESTION: What do you make of Turkish locals being banned from attending those Gallipoli services?
ANSWER: I'm not fussed at all. I do not feel censored by the Chinese Government. I left the setting up of my WeChat account to the Labor Party. So you'll have to ask them how they set it up. But I don't feel censored. I don't feel censored by either the Government, the Greens, One Nation or indeed the Chinese Government.


QUESTION: What is your gut reaction to it though, banning locals from attending the local service?
ANSWER: I didn't know about that. But I'll be guided by the Australian Government on this matter. I'll be guided by whatever the security views are. Be guided by whatever the Turkish Government says here.


QUESTION: Just on your climate change policy how is it congruent to open up the Betaloo Basin and Labor’s 45 per cent emissions reduction target?
ANSWER: I don't know what all the circumstances. So my gut reaction is don't comment until you know what is happening.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, yesterday, repeatedly, you refused to rule out reviewing the environmental approvals - the federal environmental approvals for Adani. Can you be fair dinkum with us and with voters and tell us do you rule out reviewing those approvals?
ANSWER: Because gas is going to be a transition baseload energy source of the future. What we also need to do as we move towards 45 per cent is we’ve still got to make sure we got an Australian manufacturing sector. Therefore, opening up the gas reserves will ensure cheap domestic gas for Australia, so we can keep tens of thousands of people in their jobs in the south-east and indeed in Darwin and Brisbane. I did say last question, guys. But I'll see you at the next gig. Thank you very much.


QUESTION: So well on that, Mr. Shorten, in the past you have said you don't support Adani, you said you're sceptical of it, and the CFMEU has issued this pledge which several of your candidates, including Mr. Beers have either signed or said they're going to sign. It's calling on you not to do anything to stand in the way of this project. So will do you anything to stand in the way of the project?
ANSWER: I have no plans to review the approvals. But if we want to be fair dinkum, let's be fair dinkum and let's tell the voters the truth here, all of us. First of all if I'm Prime Minister I will adhere to the law of the land. I'm not going to be intimidated or bullied by environmental activists or big mining companies. For me it is all about the best science, the law of the land and not creating sovereign risk.


QUESTION: If you become the Prime Minister, will the CFMEU be allowed to enforce closed shops on construction sites, no ticket no work?
ANSWER: It doesn't matter if it's a union who comes to me or a business, an environmental activist. What I'll do if Prime Minister, is I'll work with all of those interests, but I'm not going to be the servant of any of those interests. We will adhere to the science, we will adhere to the law, we won't create sovereign risk.


QUESTION: Could the resurrection of Clive Palmer cost you the election?
ANSWER: No. And let's just be clear on that. No. We think that the problem in Australia is that everything is going up except your wages. And we want to see enterprise bargaining resuscitated.


QUESTION: On George Christensen, what do you think he was doing in the Philippines for 294 days?
ANSWER: Listen I'm not going to get - sorry, there's only one person who has ever been resurrected and I'm not going to compare Clive Palmer to him. The point about it is, I'm not going to get distracted by Clive Palmer. If you want better health care in this country, vote Labor. If you want to get wages moving in this country again, vote Labor. If you want the pensioners to get a better deal, vote Labor. If you want to tackle the cost of living, vote Labor. If you want to make sure your three and four year olds get quality child care and it is not exorbitantly expensive, vote Labor. That's our game, the primary vote.


QUESTION: LNP candidate Gerard Rennick has been caught spreading conspiracy theories about climate change and some curious ideas about your preschool policy. What action, if any, should be taken against the candidate, and can you guarantee you would also apply that same standard to any of your candidates caught in a similar situation?
ANSWER: I think that is one of the questions of the ages. The member for Manila, but Jason's been our representative in northern Australia so I might get him to talk further.


QUESTION: Can I ask Mr Beers a question about the Adani project. Mr Shorten saying that he has no plans to review approvals is hardly ruling a review out. What do you think of that and is this hurting the chances of you winning the seat?
ANSWER: To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate believes three year old child care is a political conspiracy. To the best of my knowledge, no Labor candidate is a supporting a 12 per cent corporate tax rate, which is a massive tax cut for the big end of town. And certainly no Labor candidate believes that the Bureau of Meteorology is engaged in some conspiracy to hide the facts on climate change. The LNP has got a factory at an undisclosed location where they can find candidates so out of touch with the real world it is remarkable. Now what sort of serious policies is Mr. Morrison offering Australia when they're running a candidate in a winnable position who believes that the Bureau of Meteorology's engaged in a conspiracy to not tell the truth on climate change? This is the problem with the LNP, they're divided, they're chaotic, they are held together by sticky tape and rubber bands. Mr Morrison should distance himself from the madness of some of the views we are seeing from some of the LNP but he can't, can he? Because he is a captive of the hard right of the Liberal Party and he's never satisfactorily explained why Malcolm Turnbull is still not Prime Minister of Australia.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, I have a question for you and also a question for Mr Beers as well.
ANSWER: Oh, two questions, OK.


QUESTION: Related. So you are confirming that you are not going to sign this CFMEU pledge to not stand in the way of Adani. I just want to get clarity on that. And Mr Beers, you did sign this pledge. Why did you do that, and should Bill Shorten sign it?
ANSWER: First of all on the pledge, no I am not going to sign it. But you can deduce from that nothing other than I am not going to sign a pledge. We're very clear. For us, resources projects have to stack up scientifically and they have to stack up without requiring taxpayer money. That's how we think. That is our policy.


QUESTION: The ACTU wants to see the minimum wage rise by $50 a week. Is that the sort of increase you want to see?	ANSWER: I will get Brendan to supplement the
answer. We are not going to pick a final number but I will state this. The current adult wage for an adult is too low. It is too low. So we do want to see a rise. Under the Liberals we're experiencing massive wage stagnation. The last thing this government wants to do is talk about wages. But this election is a referendum on the cost of living and of course wage stagnation.


QUESTION: How do you expect small businesses to cope with the costs that you're loading them up with, with these increases?
ANSWER: Well, first of all, we've always made clear that whatever outcome occurs should be after consultation and negotiation with business including small business.


QUESTION: Can I ask you a question about costs because costs have started to become a theme of the press conference. We don't have an answer to the cost for small businesses when it comes to lifting wages because we don't know how much you would like to lift wages. Small businesses and businesses at large don't have an answer as to how much they are going to be hit to meet your emissions reduction target. When will we start to learn a little bit more about your electric vehicle target and the cost to households and businesses there?
ANSWER: OK let's go through each of those three points very briefly. There is a cost to Australian business when wage earners are experiencing wage stagnation. It means a decline in confidence. So there is an absolute negative cost. If working people in this country are not getting reasonable wage rises they stop spending money because they don't have it. That is the cost, confidence.


QUESTION: Just on the Greens, they want to end coal mining by 2030. Some in Queensland would say that is an extreme policy. Would you be willing to preference them below the Coalition?
ANSWER: First of all it’s a silly policy and it’s a policy that isn't going to happen. In terms of the Greens, what I say to them next time they catch a tram - trams run on steel. Steel is made through a process of using metallurgical coal. I don't think they quite know sometimes where it all comes from. But that shouldn't be used as an argument, that should not be used as an argument not to take action on climate change. And I do think that we need to actually move towards more renewable energy in our system.


QUESTION: So are you questioning the credibility of the Department, considering they said it was a fair market price that was paid?
ANSWER: I don't accept the characterisation that Tanya did what you said she did. With Adani our position is the same as it has been for the last two years and these are our principles: We will be guided by the best science, we will not use any taxpayer money, we will not engage in any sovereign risk, we will adhere to the law of the land.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, campaign headquarters dodged questions yesterday about whether you would review Federal Environmental approvals for the Adani coalmine if you become Prime Minister. Tanya Plibersek has also dodged those questions on the weekend. Can we get a clear answer - will you review them and the process involved as well as the approvals themselves?
ANSWER: We have no plans, but the point about it is this Adani has become a political football. I think everyone, that's probably the only thing that the stop Adani people agree on. If I’m Prime Minister I'm going to be governed by the law, I’m not going to be governed by either a mining company or an environmental activist. That’s what I think people of North Queensland deserve, that's what I think all Australians would expect. The final thing I would make on that, Labor is not putting all its eggs in the Adani basket. If that stacks up it stacks up in the manner in which I have already outlined. Labor is outlining $6 billion worth of infrastructure projects which will create 24,000 jobs right across Queensland. Today's latest announcement about investment in regional tourism, today's latest announcement about prioritising the best science to govern the rescue of the reef is again our commitment not only to create new jobs in North Queensland, but to protect the existing jobs.


QUESTION: Will you review the approval, the approval that, just two days before the election from Melissa Price, will you have another look at them?
ANSWER: Well, first of all, we'll let the independent umpire decide that, but we aren't going to go missing like this Government has for the last six years. What we're going to do is make a full-bodied submission. I’ll have talked to my Cabinet colleagues. We'll take the soundings from industry, we’ll hear all the points of view, but I think that Australians need a wage rise. We got wages stagnation, productivity growth in Australia is four times what wages are. You got to ask yourself - what sort of country we'll have if the current Government get returned? The penalty rates will remain cut and new cuts have been phased in. Now, this is a Government who loves to talk about a strong economy, but they're only interested in a strong economy for the top end of town. Once you add up what's happening to millions of Australian wage earners, penalty rates cut, wages stagnation, energy bills going up and up and up, out-of-pockets to see the doctor going up and child care, middle-class Australia is getting done over with a lack of interest by this Government in cost of living and wages stagnation.


QUESTION: If you win the election, how much of an increase to the minimum wage will Labor support this year?
ANSWER: I’ve got Tony here, so I will get him to supplement this, he's our point man on this. This Murray Darling scandal in my opinion highlights this is a Government not interested in the bush and not interested in climate change, not interested in handing on a better environment to our kids. This summer just passed, December, January, with the massive fish kills, unprecedented, shows there's a crisis. It's not good enough for the Morrison Government to say this is Labor's fault from 2012 or 2013. Mr Morrison and his team have been in power for over 2000 days, and the situation in the Murray Darling is going from bad to worse. In terms of a Royal Commission, let's see what the Department provides in the next 24 hours, but I might get Tony to talk further about the scandal in the Murray Darling Basin and how it is damaging our future.


QUESTION: If we can go back to the Murray Darling. This isn't the first issue around that system and there is the suggestion particularly from the Greens that Labor needs to commit to a Royal Commission. Is that something you'll commit to or is Labor leaving the door open to a Royal Commission into the Murray Darling.
ANSWER: The process is not concluded with the Queensland Government, that's the first point to make. So the ball is really in the Queensland Government's court. The second point I'll make is, we'll back the science, we'll adhere to the law, we're not going to use taxpayer money, we're not going to engage in sovereign risk. What I'll also need to just briefly make the point here is - what's the Government doing? The Federal Government, if they're so fair dinkum, why have they taken so long, and why are they keeping Melissa Price in witness protection?


QUESTION: What about Labor's record, though, Mr. Burke, the Prime Minister has just said that EAA was a company that the previous Labor Government has dealt with and this arrangement was dwarfed by the amounts committed under the previous Government?
ANSWER: Well, first of all, it's not what I want that's going to make a difference, if I'm Prime Minister…


QUESTION: Just to be clear, with the Adani groundwater decisions that were made just before the election was called, is Labor ruling out reviewing those decisions, and if you're not ruling it out, in what circumstances would you see those decisions being reviewed?
ANSWER: Sure. What I'll do as Prime Minister is adhere to the law. I'm not going to be a cheer squad for one or the other, I'm not in that caravan coming from the south, and I'm not in the cheer squad which says that don't worry about the science. If I'm the Prime Minister I'll adhere to the best science and the best law. In terms of the review, I'll just adhere to the law, that's why we have laws in this country. And another point I made earlier which deserves a little more emphasis. I'm not going to engage in sovereign risk - and I understand that people want to litigate one way or the other, and let's also talk about the bigger picture here, which is coal. Coal will be part of our energy mix going forward, but we're going to have more renewables. This cannot be an excuse for a debate by the Government into what they're not doing on climate change, that's why we're here announcing a rescue for the reef.


QUESTION: Can you rule out the review, Mr Shorten? Secondly, you continue to say you'll wait to see if Adani stacks up, do you want it to stack up?
ANSWER: Well, I'm just going off what I've read in the newspapers. It certainly seemed to be a ramshackle process, but we're just going to adhere to the law. What investors in this country want to know is, does the rule of law apply? What people who care about the environment want to know is, is there going to be respect for the environment and more action on climate change? Only Labor offers that alternative. On the environmental activist side, they say sometimes ignore the law, can't do that, won't do that. And some of the boosters for this particular project, say, oh don't worry about if it all stacks up, just get on and do it. Life's not that simple actually, what we need in this country is stability. The fact of the matter is, that this is a divided Government, the fact of the matter is they had all these arguments, even as, on the eve of the election and that's just not the way laws or investment or the environment should be looked after.


QUESTION: Voters want to know.
ANSWER: Colourful analogy, but no.


QUESTION: Mr. Shorten you've accused Coalition Members of bullying Mrs. Price over that decision she made just before the election, doesn't that suggest that there was a problem with that process and therefore why wouldn't there be a review?
ANSWER: Guys we haven't even won the election yet, so I think if I started saying, X has got a job and Y hasn't, you'd accuse us of arrogance, I do know there's one thing that Martin Parkinson has said, he is the Prime Minister's number one public servant adviser. The principal guy, the one who, you know, the Government go to to check their things. I noticed that he has warned, in a letter to us, that people shouldn't use modelling for misleading purposes, and he's cautioned against anyone thinking that his Department has modelled Labor's policies. What we need in Australia at the moment is less scare campaign and more facts. What we need is a plan for the future. What Labor is offering is real action on climate change, real action on wages, real action on cost of living. These are the things which Australians are talking to me on the campaign trail, and we're focused.


QUESTION: Your letter to Martin Parkinson about the latest politicisation of the bureaucracy, will there be a night of the long knives under a Shorten Government to hack off the heads of these Department Secretaries?
ANSWER: Again, I'm not getting into who's in and who's out, because that would imply, that somehow I thought we had won the election, that'll be the judgement of the Australian people. But I'll tell you one thing we can put to the judgement of the Australian people, if you want to save the Barrier Reef, vote Labor. If you want to back in regional tourism, vote Labor, and if you want to get your wages moving, for goodness sakes, vote Labor.


QUESTION: Will you keep Martin Parkinson at Prime Minister and Cabinet?
ANSWER: Well I'm a Victorian, spent quite a lot of years in Victoria. Listen I think Labor has a good story in Victoria but we've got a good story across Australia, but certainly one thing has been the case for Victorians under this Federal Government, they have not received their fair share of infrastructure investment. This Government hasn't invested in public transport in Melbourne suburbs, they haven't invested in the roads of the South-East. I think voters and it doesn't just go for Victoria should ask themselves a serious question about the Government, what is it they expect the Liberal’s to do now that they haven't done the past six years? And on wages that's a classic example. If you're sick of penalty rates being cut, if you're sick of low wages growth then why don't we get a Government in who has a wages policy, who will sit down with all the parties, sit down with the point of view of business, listen to the workers. But we've got to get wages moving again in this country and today's announcement I'll give you fair notice won't be the only announcement we're making this week about a coherent and sensible wages policy because most Australians are sick of everything going up except wages.


QUESTION: So Phil Gaetjens for example, would be Treasury Secretary under a Shorten Government?
ANSWER: Listen I've seen the Greens talk about this stuff. The tail doesn't wag the dog let’s be clear here. We use the word mandate a lot in politics, now I'm going to be very clear though, if we get elected we've got a mandate to change the penalty rates, put them back in in the way the way that Labor has said and indeed we got the vote through the Senate in the current Parliament. The people who are a road block to people getting a reasonable wage rise, helping deal with the cost of living are the Liberals and the Nationals in Canberra.


QUESTION: Scott Morrison is spending a lot of time in Victoria. How confident are you that you will pick up seats there?
ANSWER: I've got Brendan here so he'll supplement, but we've now had the laboratory of extreme right wing thinking in the real world, it’s no longer just a theory. This Government got the penalty rate cuts that they wanted. They voted eight time against increasing penalty rates back to where they were but let’s have a look at what's happened on Sundays and the public holidays. Under Mr Morrison's theory and Senator Cormann’s architecture of low wages it was going to be a brave new day, a brave new dawn of extra jobs on Sundays and public holidays, that has not happened, that has not happened. The University of Wollongong’s done a study. All that's happened under the Liberals is not that a lot more workers get employed on the days that you had the penalty rates get cut, all that happens is that people suffer wages cuts. I'll just get Brendan to supplement.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten just on wages you've promised within 100 days if you win power to legislate overturning that Fair Work Commission if what's required to get Senate support for that measure is to legislate a ban on unions trading away penalty's, is that something you're willing to explore?
ANSWER: I feel that we are reaching the end of this, perhaps I take one more question. I guarantee you on wages we are going to be talking all this week and the rest of the election, because when it comes to what’s happening millions of forgotten middle class Australians, the cost of living is going up, their wages aren’t growing and of course there are cuts to schools and hospitals.


QUESTION: Would this then lead to small businesses then cutting peoples hours and cutting staff because they can't afford to because they can't afford to pay those extra penalty rates which they've said time and time again that they can't do?
ANSWER: We've got several specific proposals and then some of the proposals by nature have to reflect evidence which we will subsequently get from business and from various points of view. But here's some specific numbers. For people who have had their penalty rates cut if we get in you're not going to lose $27,000 if you're a pharmacist over the next three years. If you're a restaurant or accommodation worker you're not going to lose nearly 20,000 plus over the next three years. So if you are asking specific, there's real numbers. What we've seen and over this holiday break all the way from Easter through to Anzac Day, over that ten days, people are losing between $220 - $370 so we're going to fix that straight away. In terms of the living wage and ensuring that we get the wages moving again, I can't give you the specific number because frankly I've got to listen to business, I've got to listen to the evidence from the unions and we've got to have the independent umpire involved in it. But one thing is for sure, the current minimum wage is not enough. But the rate of wage growth for millions of our fellow Australians is not enough, that is why for example we are going to crack down labour hire and start treating people better.


QUESTION: But do you know if it will lead to people in the industry reinstated?
ANSWER: Thanks, Brendan. Are there questions?


QUESTION: Does today's announcement mean that you will not seek to legislate changes to the Fair Work Act to increase the minimum wage or will you will just rely on submissions?
ANSWER: Our position is not taken lightly. We respect the independent umpire, but they got this one wrong. We live in an era of wage stagnation. Australians under this government are going through the longest, lowest period of wages growth since we were keeping records 60 years ago. So as a general rule, you don't want to interfere with the independent umpire's decision, but they got this one wrong. Of course, it is not without precedent. The independent umpire famously got it wrong when they didn't support the introduction of award based superannuation. So, there was no guaranteed minimum super. And indeed, Paul Keating and Bob Hawke stepped in to create universal superannuation as a result. So, whilst what we're doing is as a last  resort, it is not without precedent. But let's look at what this really means. Penalty rates are not a luxury. There's two ways that low paid workers get paid for working the inconvenient hours. Either through a system of penalty rates or tips. Do we really want to go down the American path of workplace relations where a worker, to make, an adult, to make ends meet has to rely on tips and charity and the coins and dollar notes left on the table after the guest has gone? That is not the Australian way. Let's also remember when we talk about penalty rates - the people who get penalty rates by and large are on 30 and 40 and $50,000 a year. Every dollar they get, they spend. And it was promised if you cut penalty rates there would be this new golden era of job creation. Well the University of Wollongong studied this. And we haven't seen an explosion in new jobs. What we have just seen is working people getting the rough end of the stick.


QUESTION: On that subject who do you talk about meaningful wage rises, Brendan O'Connor has just talked about a real wage increase which is something above inflation I guess. This is central to your pitch to Australian people, don't they need to know what that actually means in dollar terms, how much of an increase do you want to give an average worker under a Shorten Government?
ANSWER: No. Listen, I will tell you what we pin our climate change policies on - the best science. I mean, I noticed that some parts of what McKibbin says are selectively quoted by particular newspapers. But he also said, buried in that story, which you didn't go to your question, he said the Morrison government plan would be very expensive. And in yesterday's story, on the Daily Telegraph, he said the cost which The Telegraph trumpeted was a back of the envelope number. Or as we now call it the front of the Telegraph number! Either way the problem that this government has is what they call cost, I call investing. I call investing – like many companies do – in new technology and new opportunities. What this government call cost, I call protecting the future for the kids and the next generation. This government ....


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Commission was set up for a reason. Is it right for any government of the day to be able to overturn a decision that came from the Fair Work Commission?
ANSWER: ... the government is obsessed about particular micro propositions. Let's go to the big picture here. Because the big picture is where a nation should be directed towards. The big picture here is at what cost does this government think it’s too expensive to save the planet? Our research is based upon not just the best science, it is also based on consultations with industry. The Business Council of Australia, the business groups, they're the ones who say it makes sense to use international permits. This government used to believe in it. Can we just, we don't suffer from amnesia in this country, so why is it the government thinks we do? Prime Minister Morrison was Treasurer Morrison and when he came up from air from cutting schools and hospitals, he used to back a National Energy Guarantee. Now he doesn't.


QUESTION: Warwick McKibbin who you pinned your climate change costings on last week, he came out today and said that you are wrong to say that international permits can alleviate the cost of your policy because the future of them is too uncertain. Does this put one big hole in your policy?
ANSWER: Well first of all, when we talk about this, the assumption in your question wasn’t correct. What you said there is you compared their policy and ours. But the costing even done by McKibbin acknowledges that the government's policy doesn't take into account the use of international credit offsets, whereas ours does. So we are comparing different propositions. In terms of ours, we're very clear: our policy will not cost the taxpayer. The current government is paying billions of dollars in an emissions reduction fund.


QUESTION: [inaudible]
ANSWER: No, I am explaining it. To take it through, the emissions reduction fund of the government means your taxes, my taxes, everyone's taxes, get used to pay big polluters not to pollute. That is a clear cost. We are not raising a tax, we are not seeking to spend taxpayer money to pay big emitters not to emit. In terms of business, our cost is comparable to the government's. We are using the same approach of industrial safeguards. And we are allowing businesses, and we are going to support the trade-exposed sector, so we do have $300 million which we are contributing to help cement and steel and aluminium, and other emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries.


QUESTION: Why didn't you speak to McKibbin before you reference this report last week? This is what you based your costings on last week and he said you haven't spoken to him about this 4-year-old report?	ANSWER: We know that this doesn’t happen now, because we are using the same system the Government use. The Government actually have in place, you are probably aware, a system where if you emit more than a certain number of tonnes of carbon pollution into the air, the government has … the companies have to pay for that. The way that companies are defraying that is by investing in new technology, they are better at measuring what they do. What that consequentially means is we are using the same system, so of course over time, as companies reduce their carbon emissions, the cost to companies goes down. But every company has got a different story; every company has a different approach to doing it. So there is no one mythical figure. The point about it is, that we either tackle climate change or we don’t. The problem with
answering your question is simply this: your question makes no allowance for the impact of climate change. How much do you offset the cost of getting a company to stop polluting the environment against the cost of extreme weather events. Your question is only part of the equation.


QUESTION: Will you rule out a death tax?
ANSWER: Well I think that the cost of climate change is now being passed onto consumers.


QUESTION: What can you tell us about the $80 million water sale, that has hit headlines this week? Do you have concerns about that purchase that the government made and if so, what are those concerns or what are the questions that you have?
ANSWER: Well no, that’s where we fundamentally disagree. What I disagree with is simply this, and then we will move on. When you have a terrible climate event, that cost gets passed on. When you have energy bills going up under the current government, because we don’t have a policy, that cost gets passed on. I agree with Mr Turnbull and what Mr Morrison said back in 2017, a National Energy Guarantee makes sense, and that will actually improve household bills by $550.


QUESTION: So Mr. Shorten, be specific. What does the Prime Minister need do with regard to the water problem right now in the middle of an election campaign to set it right? What can, and should, he do?
ANSWER: Yeah, we think that that’s a good framework. The reason why we’ll pursue the National Energy Guarantee is I think Australians are over climate change wars. I know that government loves to pound out its scare campaign, but what scares Australians more is not dealing with climate change. So what we’ll do is we’ll use some of the Turnbull, Morrison, Frydenberg architecture, and we will work with that structure. I’d be amazed if the opposition, the Liberals if they lose the election, that they’ll continue to oppose climate change. The good news is that if Labor wins the election, I think we can put to an end the toxic climate change debate, we can prove that this nation is ready to adopt new technology, embrace more new jobs, create economic growth and lower power prices.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, costs on your emission reduction target, you said you have spoken about the government and you said it was going to be very large. It can only make sense by reason that your target is much higher than the government's, so that it must be larger, and those costs are going to go passed on to companies who have to buy carbon credits, and those costs are then going to be passed on to consumers. Why can't you say what the dollar figure is, that businesses are going to be asked to pay when it comes to buying those credits, so that consumers can understand what it is going to cost them. Can you give us a single figure on what it is going to cost, sir?
ANSWER: Our policies will be a net benefit for the economy. We believe that if you invest in making climate change changes now, and lowering carbon pollution, this will benefit the economy. I don’t accept that acting on climate change has a cost. I believe not acting on climate change has a cost. You’re looking at some of the inputs, I’m looking at what we get for the end of the process.


QUESTION: [inaudible}
ANSWER: Well, on the cystic fibrosis announcement, absolutely. We’re very supportive of that. CF is a dreadful disease. But in terms of the Government announcing $100 million dollars on cancer, I remember the last two weeks. This government has viciously attacked me for trying to tackle the out of pocket costs of cancer. Now what this government has done is belatedly realise cancer is real issue in the community. Individually they may have known it, but collectively as a government, the current prime minister got out there and day after day attacked me for wanting to reduce the out of pocket costs of cancer treatment. It’s good that they’re going to do some more in the regions. After all, Labor said we’re going to put $250 million dollars into reducing waiting lists, $500 million into tackling public hospital cancer support and we have put a total package of $2.3 billion into tackling cancer over the next four years. The government can’t have it both ways. They can’t say on one hand that we’re stupid to be tackling cancer, and then on the other hand, expect a whole bunch of flowers for doing 1/25th of what we’re doing.


QUESTION: It’s not an answer, do you have a figure as to what it’s going to cost for businesses, who will pass that cost onto consumers? Because there has to be a dollar figure.
ANSWER: First question is, is the prime minister satisfied with the probity of all the decisions. And if he is, will he agree to an audit, or a commission of enquiry, to demonstrate that the questions being raised are not valid. He needs to come clean. He needs to say does he 100 per cent guarantee Barnaby Joyce’s actions? Does he 100 per cent guarantee everything Angus Taylor did? And if he does, he needs to demonstrate to the public why he is so confident in these matters. In terms of just finishing this up, Tim made a point. Yes, where the government does something good on health, I’m going to back it in. It’s a shame the government doesn’t have the shame view towards us, the same commitment. But that’s the sort of prime minister I’ll be. Where someone else has a good idea, I’ll back it in. The National Energy Guarantee. Don’t think it was perfect, but I think people are sick of the us versus them rubbish which masquerades as Australian politics. On health care, cystic fibrosis, tick. But why won’t the Prime Minister back in our $2.3 billion commitment on cancer? Why won’t he back in our reductions to waiting lists today? Newspapers are reporting that waiting lists have blown out under this government. I’ll tell you why waiting lists have blown out. Because the prime minister of Australia is the cutter in chief. The cutter of health funding, the cutter of education funding, the cutter of penalty rates. The Australian people want fair dinkum plans for the future not cuts, cuts and cuts and not too little, too late. Thank you everybody.


QUESTION: But do you concede that that cost would be passed on to consumers?
ANSWER: Any questions about this or other matters?


QUESTION: But it is going to be much bigger.
ANSWER: Well whilst I'm not running for Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, especially as Michael Gunner is doing such a good job, gee the new Gunner Government was left with a lot of problems by the outgoing administration, the CLP-run people. You know, the CLP managed to do the double - the daily double. They managed to sell government assets, the assets of the people, the TIO, lease out the port for 99 years, so they got a whole lot of money in. So they sold assets that belonged to the people of the Territory and they still ran up massive debt and deficit. So the Gunner Government’s certainly got its work cut out for it. We will be announcing more details about further support for the Northern Territory. But if you want to talk about a Northern Territory package, Labor has already begun to outline our meaningful support in tourism, in roads, in health and education. Only Labor can be trusted nationally by the Territorians to make sure that you get a fair go.


QUESTION: Will you pursue the NEG in government if the opposition is opposed to it …
ANSWER: Well, what we'll do in our way is we’ll put more investment in the Territory. I get there's a legitimate concern to make sure that no one gets disadvantaged in GST, and it was Labor nationally, working with the McGowan Government in Western Australia, who ensured the West got their fair share. So our door will be open to talk to Western Australia, not about changing the GST formula, but making sure the Northern Territory gets its fair share of investment.


QUESTION: If we can keep on climate change for just a little bit longer, you have dismissed the $25 billion figure and the $60 billion dollar figure that was put out; you say that the Government’s policies are going to be expensive. So you have looked at the economic cost and not necessarily the cost-benefit analysis, but just the cost of certain policies. The benefit is quite a way away. Do you know just the cost to the economy, not to the government and not to taxpayers coffers, on businesses, on the economy of your policies.
ANSWER: Our climate change plans will grow the economy, they'll create jobs and they'll lower power prices. I notice there's been a bit of a debate and a bit of a scare campaign by the News Limited papers talking about international offsets for carbon pollution reduction. And I thought this was something which both sides of politics had agreed on so I did a little bit of homework and I found this very interesting quote, which I think goes to the baseless, fraudulent scare campaign of the Morrison Government, backed up by their allies in some parts of the media. And it says, this quote says, "When it comes to helping the environment, it doesn't matter if you've reduced a tonne of CO2 here in Australia or in another country." I thought, well that makes sense. But I was surprised to find it was Josh Frydenberg who said that. So what we have is the government’s now scaring you about their own policies they used to have and support. When it comes to carbon pollution reduction, our strategy is the lowest cost abatement using a combination of international tools and domestic tools and might I also say plenty of incentives. Did you know that if we properly invest in renewables, there would be tens of thousands of new jobs? And did you know that if we don't take action, we're going to have a greater cost on our insurance on and arising from natural disasters.


QUESTION: $165 million dollars today on health expenditure, in regional Australia and in Westmead Hospital in Sydney Mr Shorten, not from Labor, but from the Prime Minister. Having gone so hard on health for so long in this campaign, you’d applaud that wouldn’t you?
ANSWER: Well, let's go through the whole position on tax and I'll be as brief as I can. But let's just state some facts. First of all, there's the first round of tax cuts proposed in the next term of government, whoever forms a government. Labor’s said that we have the same position. In fact we have a better position for 3.6 million people who earn less than $40,000. And in fact we've led the tax debate. In my Budget Reply speech of 2018, I proposed bigger, better, fairer tax cuts and the government then gradually, after a year of kicking and screaming, matched us. So on the first round of tax cuts, it's all the same except we're slightly better for people under $40,000. On the second and third round, they don't come in for a number of years and what we found when you study the fine print of the fraudulent claims of this government on tax is that they're promising people a tax rise on the never-never and they never explain upfront with how you pay for it. And let me, let me explain therefore how they pay for it - cuts, cuts, cuts. This government is addicted to cuts. We've had six years of cuts. You know, I never lose sight of the fact that current Prime Minister was the Treasurer for the last three years. He's the cutter-in-chief. Cutter-in-chief of schools, cutter-in-chief of hospitals, cutter-in-chief of services. How this government pays for these future tax cuts, which would require you to vote for the current government at least twice in two more elections, what it does is it requires billions of dollars of cuts. The Grattan Institute exposed this, called out the secret. The other thing is that let's look at the priorities of this government on their tax cuts. Did you know that there's $77 billion hidden away in the Budget to give tax cuts to the top three per cent of taxpayers? Or, put another way, in even more plain English, if you are a millionaire in Australia, you will get an $11,000 tax cut from the Morrison Government in 2024. If you are someone who earns $40,000 a year, you get $11 a week. For me, tax reform is about priorities. Yes, we would like to see more personal income tax reform, but what we won't do is sacrifice the schools, sacrifice the waiting lists, sacrifice the hospitals to make an unfunded promise, and this is the inherent lie of the government's position: they want to look after the top end of town by cutting services to everyone.


QUESTION: What questions do say that government needs to answer over the $80 million dollar water deal?
ANSWER: Well first of all, it is just a nonsense claim. It is a nonsense claim and it is built upon the back of a big lie. It says somehow that using international offsets to help abate carbon is a bad thing. Well, if it's a bad thing, why don't go they to Josh Frydenberg, the current treasurer and say, you used to believe it didn't matter where you cut the carbon from so long as you were cutting the carbon. Well that's our view. In terms of the costs, we're relying on the same public modelling that the government has. But you know, these News Corp climate change deniers, and of course their ally, the Prime Minister - a coal-wielding, climate-denying cave-dweller on this issue - they all say, "Look at the cost," well they never mention the cost of the extreme weather events, do they? They never mention the cost of not getting into renewables and they never mention energy prices, do they? This is a government who every quarter used to rush out for the last few years and say energy prices are going down. Well that lie has been exposed. Energy prices are up 15 per cent because we don't have proper investment, because we don't have proper rules around energy. Hang on, I'll come to you. Just over here.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the member for Solomon said that there would be a support package for the NT. Will the Federal Government or a Federal Labor Government be bailing out the Northern Territory from their current financial crisis?
ANSWER: Well first of all, the issue of climate change has been getting away from Australia for the last ten years. The people of Australia are fed up with politics. We want to talk about what has been getting away-- why is this nation paralysed on climate change? It's because one half of the Liberal Party, the bully boys, bully the other half. The reality is, if the Liberals could be trusted on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. What's been getting away from Australians is the fact that energy prices are going up. We are having a technophobic debate where we're told to be afraid of new renewables technology and keep doubling down and investing in power plants that are 50 and 60 years old. This climate change debate for a decade has been dysfunctional and dishonest and divisive. It's about time we backed the science and we backed the people.


QUESTION: Will that include GST top-ups?
ANSWER: Well, you keep going on cost. I want to say to you let's get this straight. What is the cost of taking no action? What is the cost of no action? I can tell you. Energy prices are up. When did this Government get a leave on its own appalling and abysmal track record on energy prices? Australians are angry. They're angry at a Government who can't work out taking real action on climate but want to push all the problems down the road and let our kids sort it out when they actually want action now, and Australians are angry at their power bills. Cost of living is the big issue. Cost of living and wages are the big issue in Australia. The middle class of Australia feel like forgotten Australia. They feel like that Bob Hawke had a view of Australia that looked after them, and they even thought John Howard had a view of Australia. The middle class are looking at this election, and they are saying to the government, "You're promising us nothing now, and you won't take action on climate change, you haven’t got a wages policy, all you want to do is cut, cut, cut." The big question, the big secret, is how does this government pay for its tax cuts on the never-never? Tax cuts which go disproportionately to the most well-off in our society? I will tell you how Mr Morrison pays for looking after the top end of town and the top three per cent of taxpayers - by making you, and every Australian, pay more for your health care and get less services in your hospitals and aged care.


QUESTION: Will there be any cost to business under Labor's climate change plans?
ANSWER: The $25 billion dollar figure is just a lie. It’s using - you can make any number work for you if you pump in the assumptions you want to. It is using top-price EU carbon offset prices and then saying that's the only thing that will happen. That is so intellectually dishonest it does not even deserve to be talked about. What we are going to do is start looking at how we help industry meet the future. You know, the big missing link in this whole debate - it's as if the government never tried to do did climate change. Now they have tried and failed. What we are doing is we are using their industrial safeguards mechanism. We are using their National Energy Guarantee. What we are doing is going to work with our energy intensive trade-exposed sectors: cement, steel, aluminium and other sectors. We have created a $300 million dollar fund to help them invest in new technology. The reality is that once companies - and I've visited the factories and organised the workforce, I've seen the technology, I've sat in the boardrooms - every company who invests in lower carbon pollution creates more productivity and more efficiency and they invest in new technology.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten on the question of tax cuts, there's a report in newspapers this morning suggesting that Labor has taken a decision not to offer additional tax cuts for people on incomes between $90,000 and $120,000 or $125,000 a year. Can I – one – ask, can you confirm that Labor has taken that decision? And - two, if you can – what’s that say to people on those incomes? Doesn't it say, "You've got enough money and you're doing well"?
ANSWER: Tim, you and I know this is a fundamentally dishonest debate. It’s not you or the people asking the questions - it is what the government's saying. It is so dishonest. You all recognise a scare campaign when you see one. I'll give you three numbers. 50,000 more jobs in renewables, if we go down our path. I'll give you another number - $18 billion dollars, the cost of natural disasters, but here I'll even give you a more modest number: When this government, when the current Prime Minister was the loyal Treasurer, of the previous Prime Minister - if you believe that I've got a bridge to sell you - but anyway, when the Prime Minister was the Treasurer, when the current Treasurer was the former Environment Minister and when Malcolm Turnbull was still on top, they said the National Energy Guarantee would deliver $550 in lower household prices on energy. The numbers we're using, are the numbers the experts are given, they're the publicly available numbers, and they're in some cases, Malcolm Turnbull's own numbers.


QUESTION: The Australian is suggesting that your carbon credits policy would cost Australians $25 billion. I take it it's a figure you reject. How much would it cost?
ANSWER: Yeah, I can, and I'm also fortunate to have people of the calibre of Senator Dodson here and I might give him a run on the ball, but I'll just make this. The current CDP's not working. And if you don't believe me, just talk to the thousands of people in remote communities who rely on CDP. We have got a view that it needs to be reformed and we will reform it, but I might invite Pat to talk about some of the defects in the current scheme, and our thinking about going forward.


QUESTION: Thank you. Isn't this issue starting to get a bit away from you? Is it a bit glib to blame News Limited? Shouldn't you announce the costings, bring that forward, bring voters in on your plans?
ANSWER: Just hang on, hang on, gentlemen, ladies, we've a fair go at this press conference, perhaps I'll allow one more question and then we got to finish up, we've got to go to Tiwi.


QUESTION: Do you have a rough figure at least on how much it would cost?
ANSWER: Sorry what was the last bit of your question?


QUESTION: A report in the paper today states the McKibbin report estimates that it would cost businesses $25 billion by 2030 to buy the foreign carbon credits. Can you say how much money you believe Australian businesses will have to pay to buy these carbon credits over the next decade? Is this the $25 billion figure accurate? Is it more? Is it less?
ANSWER: Well, first of all, it's publicly available, now if we're saying, the campaign against climate change by this government is malicious and stupid. It's malicious because there are elements of this government, the right wing, who have undermined even people in the Liberal Party to take action on climate change, and whenever we talk about common sense on climate change, you just get a scare campaign run by the more extreme elements - just hang on- this is really important, cause climate change is an important issue in this election, and it's a malicious campaign by this government. What they want to do is scare Australians and say that it's too hard to take action on climate change, even though they ignore the fact that two million households have solar on their rooftops. It's also a stupid campaign. And this goes to costs. You know, the world is moving far more investment into energy generation from renewables, it is stupid to want to miss out on what the rest of the world is doing. It is stupid to say to people that you don't need to change. That nothing needs to change, and you can all have it all very good in the future without change. This is a malicious and stupid campaign. And when I hear people say, well the McKibbin report, those figures aren't right, well, you know what in climate change, there will never be enough figures to satisfy the climate sceptics. If you don't believe in the science of climate change, no amount of evidence will ever convince you, because fundamentally it's a stupid position not to take action. Thanks everybody.


QUESTION: $25 billion is a lie, Mr Shorten, you say, but isn't the problem here you don't have a number to put in its place? And as long as you don't have a number to put in its place, why should we be confident that you're taking the Australian economy somewhere where you know how it's going to be affected at the end of the line?
ANSWER: Thanks, Bill. Well said. Good morning, everyone. There's a lot of you and we're keen to have all the question we can do. I might just start on my left and work around and see if everyone can get a crack.


QUESTION: On Indigenous Affairs, Bill Shorten, Labor has said it will abolish the Community Development Program, and is campaigning hard on that issue here in the Territory. What is your new plan, and if you can't tell us today, will that be outlined before the election?
ANSWER: Thanks for that. And I should also give a shout-out to James who asked the question yesterday. I thought I was being asked have we got any unannounced changes to superannuation and we've already made the announcements of the changes we're going to make. But obviously we have changes which we outlined three years ago, and of course I should have picked the words better, no question. We have no proposals other than what we've already announced previously. No changes to the general taxation treatment other than what we have announced recently. Just to remind people, we have said that we will lower the concessional contribution cap from $250,000 income to $200,000. We've also said that we will change the non-concessional contribution caps to $75,000, so we've made some announcements. But I also have to say I notice that the government has reverted to type with their, you know, lying about our policies. When you close down concessions and loopholes, this is not some massive increase in taxation. We're just saying we think these resources can be used better and of course when it comes to helping people contribute to their superannuation, we're not going to be lectured by a government who, with no mandate and no notice, changed the rules for amounts higher than $1.6 million. They made retrospective changes, which we opposed the retrospective nature of those changes. Also, we're not going to be lectured by a government who's frozen superannuation contributions, the compulsory contribution at 9.5 per cent. That's been such a disaster for low-paid people and middle-class people in this country. It's just real economic vandalism.


QUESTION: The announcement you've made today, about ending and addressing youth suicide, and some of those other issues, isn't the core issue here, though making sure that people can participate in a real economy in some of these communities? And how is the Shorten Government going to change what's going on at the moment to ensure that can happen, and will some reform of the Land Rights Act be part of that?	ANSWER: The Grattan Institute have been very busy and we like to talk a bit about some of their reports, not just your one. On your specific
answer it's at 9.5 per cent now and I'll ask Chris to supplement.


QUESTION: What are your thoughts then, on the Northern Territory Government handing back the leases on 44 remote communities to the Coalition, then? And what would Labor do differently if they were in Government? Would they solve this housing stoush with the NT Government?
ANSWER: Because we are costing our 45 per cent reduction with international offsets, so in fact, it does cost the same. The Government's 26 per cent doesn't have that. But further on climate change – we've given hundreds of talks about our policy on climate change, and we think it is an important issue in this election. So we can, you're referring, quite accurately to the McKibbin modelling but there are other costs which we should recognise. Inaction on climate change is going to cost Australians in the future. Just ask the Property Council, just ask the Insurance Council. Just look at the increase in extreme weather events, just look at the number of weather records broken on a constant basis. Did you know that our natural disasters cost us in 12 months, $18 billion. Now, we can't turn all of that around overnight with the policy, but we want to be a Government who hands on a better deal to our kids on climate change. The other cost of inaction is of course rising energy prices. Single biggest contributor to rising energy prices is a lack of a climate and energy policy in this country. The current Government is on to their 13th energy policy and their third Prime Minister. This isn't good enough. We're seeing a rise in prices because we're not creating policy certainty, because therefore the generation is not being invested in.


QUESTION: Ms King, can I ask you about chest pain clinics, if that's okay?	ANSWER: Obviously, going back and reading it and rereading what James asked me, you're right. I was
answering a question which I thought I'd been asked, and I accept that it was a different question asked. But you're all formidable journalists. You know that our policies have been out there for three years. I'm sure that you're probably all aware of them. And of course, today has been an opportunity to remind people of them.


QUESTION: Would Labor support BDI or Baker IDI's call for rapid chest pain clinics to be rolled out, is that something you would support?
ANSWER: Well, I don't accept your characterisation that it’s raising taxes. When you wind back a concession that is stopping a tax expenditure which is not raising it. But let's be very clear - we're not going to take a lecture from the Government. Our policies are out there for people to see. But we're not going to take a lecture from the Government who retrospectively ambushed people with superannuation with their holdings by creating a retrospective timetable to pay more taxes. And also, one of great shames of this Government is that for the last number of years, mandatory minimum contributions have been stuck at 9.5 per cent.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, regarding, on the-	ANSWER: I'll get Chris to supplement this but I do dispute the characterisation as a tax increase. I absolutely do. What happens when you give a concession to someone is that's a tax expenditure. If I was to give you a concession on something, that is money that we take out of the tax system, which you get. That is a concession to you. And that, therefore, becomes a choice. Is it the best use of a concession to give someone a concession, preferential treatment on one aspect of superannuation, or to invest in other parts of our nation's priorities. I'll get Chris to
answer.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, regarding your claim that with your climate policies, we'd have GDP growth of 23 per cent in the 2020s, is that business as usual, the same as if you didn't have the climate plan, and where did you get the numbers from, I understand it's from the McKibbin report, but isn't that a bit outdated?	ANSWER: First of all, this Government's going with proposed tax cuts which means that you have to vote in at least two elections. By 2022, we think this Government is making up these tax cuts. Or in other words, they can't pay for them. The question which this Government hasn't yet
answered is - how do they pay for these? See, once you take this tax income out of the budget, you’ve got to replace it. There's only two or three ways you do it. By raising more taxes somewhere else. By paying more interest on the national debt, which has doubled under the Liberals, or by cutting services. And this is why the Grattan Institute, who was quoted earlier in another matter, they’ve released a report that shows that this Government has got secret cuts that will involve tens of billions of dollars of cuts to services. So we think that these tax cuts that the Government are promising are a mirage. We certainly agree with the Government on the first round of tax cuts. In fact, we've got better tax cuts for 3.6 million people under $40,000. But this Government cannot explain its mirage of tax cuts in the future, on the never-never, unless they explain what they're going to cut in the way of services. And it's a matter of choices. I'm not going to make a promise about tax cuts which are a mirage which this Government hasn't explained how they pay for them. I think Australians want to see the detail and that's what we're doing with our plans and our proposals. I mean for example, for me the killer number which shows this Government's either radically out of touch or just lying to the people of Australia, is that under Mr Morrison's tax plan for Australians, if you're a millionaire, you'll get a tax cut under Mr Morrison of $11,000. But if you're a person on $40,000, Mr Morrison only wants to give you $11 a week. It just shows you his priorities and who he is backing in. And the only way he can pull off this stunt of giving millionaires $11,000 in tax refund and people on $40,000, $11 a week, is by taking the axe to health and education services. And as we've seen today, I just think that health is more important than giving a millionaire an $11,000 tax cut.


QUESTION: I understand that figure was from the McKibbin report, isn't that a bit outdated now?
ANSWER: Let's be really clear, other than what we've already announced.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, yesterday when you said you had no intention of increasing taxes on superannuation, were you not including already proposed Labor policies of up to $34 billion worth of changes to the super savings? Were you just saying there wouldn't be any new ones, or did you forget that policy?	ANSWER: I'll get Chris to
answer that.


QUESTION: So, I'd like to clarify the compulsory employer contributions. Will you increase that? It is at 9 per cent currently, would you increase that? And what would you say to the Grattan Institute report that says that could hurt low-income Australians?
ANSWER: The empirical evidence shows that, over time, when there's been an increase in compulsory superannuation it hasn't affected wages growth. So, I'm familiar with what they say, but I don't accept it based on previous evidence.


QUESTION: Sorry, Chris. The Grattan Institute is warning that an increase to the compulsory super guarantee to employees would hurt low income workers.
ANSWER: Well, we want to make sure that we're getting all of the sectors contributing to it. We’ve said that we want to see the electricity or the power generation industry contribute, do its bit to reduce by 45 per cent. We think it can do that. We believe, through our system, and I'm not too proud to say it,  we're borrowing from Mr Turnbull and the then-Treasurer Mr Morrison's National Energy Guarantee. We think that this is a good system  which can actually be made to work, and as we explained to an earlier question, using international offsets, we think it's sensible and considered.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten you’ve referenced in your modelling which shows that your emissions target reduction would cost the same as the Government's. How will it cost the same as the Government’s, considering that you have a bigger target? How will it cost the same?
ANSWER: What we'll do is, the labour hire crackdown actually does help people above the minimum wage. One of the growing unfairnesses in Australian workplaces is you could be a diesel fitter at Volgren, which is the bus construction company, and you could have someone work alongside you- well, I won't use Volgren, because they might have a different arrangement for labour hire, but in many companies you’ve got someone who works directly for the employer and then they bring in someone else who has got the same trades qualifications and they work not for the employer but for a labour hire company who then contracts this person to the in-house company.


QUESTION: The question on superannuation yesterday was very clear. It's hard to believe that you misunderstood it. You could easily have specified that you only meant you would add no more policies on top of the ones already announced. Does it not look dishonest, like you’re trying to hide something when you don't mention that?
ANSWER: No, our target is to reduce by 45 per cent-


QUESTION: You have an opportunity today to clear the record and be up-front with the Australian people about how much you will raise income taxes on superannuation.
ANSWER: Sorry, I’ve just got a, Jono, good morning.


QUESTION: Do you dispute the Government's figure of $34 billion over a decade?
ANSWER: Mr Lea.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten opposed to superannuation taxation, income tax. The Government is going to the election with tax cuts aimed at people on $90,000 to $120,000 in 2022. They are not high income earners, if you live in Sydney, you live in Perth, that is not a high income. What do you say to those people that, under your present plan, you are not offering anything else?
ANSWER: We will see, across the 2020s, as a result of our energy policies and our climate policies, GDP growth of about 23 per cent. In terms of offsets, we allow companies to purchase offsets if they need to, if they can't meet their carbon emission reductions by changes in productivity in their workplaces.


QUESTION: You ruled out any further changes to superannuation taxes.
ANSWER: Yeah, I do disagree with that, and what we are happy to do is provide you with further information about international offsets. But I don't accept that the price of buying international offsets is anywhere in that dimension.


QUESTION: Other than what you've announced, yes. What about any changes to superannuation arrangements to stop accounts being eaten up by fees and exorbitant charges?
ANSWER: I've said that I think - I don't think, I know - our economy is going to grow. I don't accept the characterisation that it is a cost. We're going to grow, and we're going to grow because we are going to move to a lower carbon pollution economy. And there's other aspects which means that we will grow. But the modelling has been done. McKibbin did his modelling: 45 per cent with international offsets, 26 per cent for government without.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, every day you say to Australians that everything is going up except the wages, the Grattan report says that the change to the super guarantee could keep wages down by 2 per cent. Are they wrong?
ANSWER: Well, first of all, what I would say, what contributes to challenges for the economy is this current government. The economy is more than just climate change.


QUESTION: With your climate change policy, what proportion of the emissions reduction will be required from the electricity sector?
ANSWER: I agree with that comment, Dan. Thanks.


QUESTION: On wages, Mr Shorten, you'll be meeting with some more workers today, but I would like to find out what you are going to do to increase their wages beyond your policies of re-introducing penalty rates and cracking down on labour hire. How will you work to increase the wages of people who are not on the minimum wage?
ANSWER: No, I don’t think so, but Chris has been having a look at this matter. I have been working on some other propositions today, so I will get him to supplement. But it is a test for Mr Morrison. Is it really right that someone takes 11 weeks off every year to go to the Philippines? They’re elected to represent locals, not people in another country.


QUESTION: On Jane’s question, sorry, the cut in the electricity sector, will that be more than the 26 per cent cut in that sector that the Coalition is promising?
ANSWER: Sorry, I want to get, I don’t want to annoy Tim.


QUESTION: -In the electricity sector?
ANSWER: Alright, what’s your question, if there’s no mileage in me nice to you?


QUESTION: Can I just confirm that-
ANSWER: I was only joking. It’s ‘be kind to Tim’ day.


QUESTION: Good morning, Mr Shorten.	ANSWER: Fair’s fair, I did
answer it just before, but in terms of our climate policies, we are very clear about our directions. These matters have been modelled and the debate is not a new debate is it, Anthony? I was just reminded as I was listening to the discussion that the CSIRO and Melbourne University have said that if we don’t move to the Paris targets, which is what Labor is saying we should move to, but if we don’t move to it the CSIRO and the University of Melbourne say it is going to cost Australian families $14,000 per household. So there is a lot of information out there.


QUESTION: You've had 23 hours to think about yesterday's answer. Can you give final detail on how much the emissions reduction target will impact the economy? What that figure will be? And you've talked about offsets. How much money do you expect or believe you need to spend on those international offsets to meet your target?
ANSWER: It’s called wages stagnation. It’s called the deregulation of the labour market through legal tactics. The fact of the matter is that since 2016 corporate profits have gone up on average 39 per cent, wages 5 per cent. I’m going to repeat that, because that is a big issue. Under a Liberal Government it’s never been a better time to be a top end of town corporate profiteer but it’s never been a worse time to be a working Australian. Millions of our fellow Australians have had no wages movement. So what we have seen is the consequences of this government’s economic policies where they have had one plan for most of their life in government which is to give a tax cut to the big end of town. You know they did vote 26 times against a banking royal commission. And in the meantime we have seen penalty rates cut, we’ve seen the expansion of labour hire, casualisation, we’ve seen the greater use of the termination of existing wages agreements to coerce people into lower conditions. We’ve seen revelations of rampant wages theft. We’ve seen the over-reliance on fixed term contracts in health and education. I mean how hard is it being a young person in this country. You do your teachers qualification and you come out and you say you are doing everything the nation tells you to do and then you just get a series of rolling short-term contracts for years after years after years. So the problem is that under the Liberals you can’t trust them to get wages moving. But we will always consult. We will always make sure that the improvements are modest but meaningful. We’ll also take the advice of the economists, and we will listen to industry and business. Thanks everybody it has been a nice conference, see you all later today.


QUESTION: I'm not sure that's a financial figure, though, in just how much it's going to cost the economy, because BA Economics says it will cost $472 billion over the next 10 years? Do you disagree with that, and if so, how much is it going to cost?
ANSWER: We’re here to explain Labor’s great policies for this election. In particular, on this visit we’re talking about our exciting new ideas to improve health funding. At the top of the list is new money - $20 million – to help leukaemia patients when they’re in the battle for their life. Blood cancers, of which leukaemia is one, take a terrible toll amongst our fellow Australians. We want to encourage more cancer drug trials, so that people can have access to life-saving medicine.


QUESTION: Is there a figure on how much it's going to cost the economy?
ANSWER: Well you would love to know what business Tim is in, he obviously is having some business difficulties already, but let me just say this on climate change. First of all, taking action on climate change is good for the economy. Lack of action on climate change has led to an increase in energy prices. We know that investing in renewables is going to lead to 70,000 extra jobs. Western Australia is well placed to be a climate change leader, and that will lead to cheaper energy. Some other good news for a small businessperson, without knowing the exact small business he’s in, we are going to back lower taxes for small business, so that it will go from 30 per cent down to 25 per cent. We are also going to increase the ability of him to invest in new productive technology. If it’s over $20,000 any small business will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off their tax. So, if you’re in food, and you buy a new fridge, you will be able to claim an extra 20 per cent off whatever the cost on top of what you already claimed and that will help you with cash flow, and that is great.


QUESTION: What if we don’t grow. There’s forecasts now that we're facing increasing headwinds, domestically and internationally. There's businesses out there which are concerned about facing a recession. What happens if we don't grow over the next five years?	ANSWER: Well, you made a preamble to this question. I have
answered questions on climate change many times, many times. But I understand that perhaps people don’t always look at your old interviews, and every interview is as if it is the first time you have ever spoken. But on the modelling, first of all, $18 billion is the cost of natural disasters around Australia, so there is a cost to not taking action. Power prices have gone up across Australia. That’s because we don’t have a national energy policy, while this government’s had thirteen different national energy policies. When there’s no certainty on energy policy, people don’t invest in new energy. In terms of our proposals, modelling by Warwick McKibbin has shown that our 45 per cent reduction, including international offsets, has the same economic impact as the Liberals’ 26 per cent, who are not having international offsets, so, there you go.


QUESTION: Can I take you to George Christensen, and a tip of the hat to Galloway here, as well: George Christensen, is it right that he used taxpayer funds for flights connecting to overseas?	ANSWER: Yeah. I would pick a more positive number than costs. GDP growth is going to be 23 per cent across the course of the 2020s. These are straight
answers.


QUESTION: Chris Bowen, can I ask, I know-
ANSWER: I don’t think any of us that extreme weather events are getting less frequent, are they?


QUESTION: Chris Bowen, can I ask you, are you suggesting that the Liberals have scrubbed clean their website of information that would embarrass them, or is the webmaster there just having a bad day.
ANSWER: If you don’t start – you are quite right, and what sort of world are we passing on to the next generation? We know this government is paralysed on climate change, and if they weren’t, Malcolm Turnbull would still be the Prime Minister, wouldn’t he?


QUESTION: But you could release the pages that you have taken off the Labor website so we could look at them and see whether they have been excluded because of embarrassing mistakes.
ANSWER: Well, I don’t accept that. First of all, the idea that the environment and the economy are two separate planets and separate solar systems is rubbish. I know that’s not what you’re saying, but some people think that they are two different worlds. The second thing is that good climate policy is good economic policy. The fact of the matter is, we should be an energy superpower, we have got more gas in the ground than just about anywhere else in the world. The fact of the matter is we are the sunniest and windiest continent, and yet we don’t benefit from that. The fact of the matter is, in Australia two million households now have solar on the roof top, and what we have got to do is get more battery systems in. You know, I think Australians are sick and tired of a debate that says the future is too hard. Look at all this carry on about electric vehicles. We’ve said that we would like to see a target of 50 per cent of new car sales in 12 years’ time should be electric vehicles. Now, that is not a big of a jump as it seems. We don’t make cars here anymore because this government did not do anything to save it. The reality is, the rest of the world is moving to produce more electric vehicles. Toyota is going to offer an electric model of all its vehicles from 2025 onwards. So it’s all about … the beauty of all of this is why shouldn’t Australian motorists have options? At the moment, all we get is the very expensive cars, but once we’ve got a government that is willing to put in charging stations so that people in the bush can use electric vehicles, why shouldn’t Australians get access to vehicles that are cheaper on petrol?


QUESTION: Can I just confirm with the emissions reduction target that you will release full costings that will answer Jonathon’s question before the election?
ANSWER: Well, sorry, no, it’s actually been shown that over time when you pay for less petrol, it actually costs less. But I agree, at the moment the models are expensive, but this isn’t all about what happens next week and it’s not all about trying to take someone’s ute off them. We have got to have a political debate in this country which is not about scaring everyone, but says “this is what the future looks like”. What good is a government to Australians if it says that we are not going to plan for the future, we have no idea what’s coming down the road, we are not interested in international trends. This is the equivalent of a government arguing in favour of black and white television rather than colour, or AM over FM, although I like AM too.


QUESTION: In regards to Labor’s wages policy, the Fair Work Commission which sets the minimum wages was set up be a Labor Government. At the time, neither Labor nor yourself as Minister was complaining about decisions the Fair Work Commission was making. Can you explain what’s actually changed between now and then that we now have a problem in the decisions that they are making.
ANSWER: I just didn’t realise that we had a technophobic government who is afraid of new technology.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, this morning you were with asked about the Sharrouf children being brought back. What possible reason is there for not bringing them back to their family in Australia?
ANSWER: For and against. I guess my point is this: if you want to keep driving a petrol car, you can. Excellent. We’re not mandating anything.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, significant parts of your negative gearing policy have been taken down from Labor’s website, charts and graphics explaining how the policies will work. Can you explain why that’s happened?
ANSWER: No, I’m happy if you do. What car you choose to drive is your business. It’s not my business. My job as a potential Prime Minister of Australia is to make sure that you have got the choices and the options and that we are not ignoring what is happening in the rest of the world. What if you had a doctor that said there might be new medicines or new treatments overseas “Oh no no, that is not the way we have ever done it in Australia, we can’t access that.” We can’t be anti the future. What we have to do is make sure that the future doesn’t leave people behind.


QUESTION: Do you, and if you do, why do you believe that Australian taxpayer money should go towards helping restore Notre Dame?
ANSWER: Well, let’s go back to this. When you give a tax credit to someone who is not paying income tax, that is a gift. Now, it’s not immoral – I don’t blame Barry for taking the gift – I don’t blame him at all, it’s not illegal. But how can you give a tax refund to someone who hasn't paid income tax? It is a gift and the problem is that this gift when John Howard introduced it in 2001 was costing half a billion dollars to the Budget. Now it is costing nearly $6 billion. When will we decide that this gift is too big? When will we decide that it's not correct that we should be giving a gift rather than funding our schools and aged care? It’s a matter of choices.


QUESTION: Notre Dame, in Paris.
ANSWER: Because it is costing $6 billion. The reality is that when you go to hospital it costs a lot more than $2000, I need to find money for our ageing population. Did you know 411,000 Australians, nearly heading towards 420,000 in the next year or so, are going to be diagnosed as living with dementia? That is expensive. We have schools, we have childcare going up in cost, energy prices have gone up. Did you know everything in Australia is going up except wages? So I am not saying it is illegal or immoral. We are saying that anyone who is on a pension or a part pension is exempt from the change, but there is no principle of tax law since the ancient Romans, no textbook ever has said you should get a tax refund when you haven't paid tax.


QUESTION: Should Australian special forces be used to get the Sharrouf children and other Australian children out of Syria?
ANSWER: Well I like Melissa. I think she is an accomplished woman and she was a good Member of Parliament when she was there and she's also worked overseas for the United Nations and refugees so, I like her. In terms of her candidacy, she thought it would be good to run and then she made a decision that she didn't want to become a distraction and of her own volition she decided to take a step back again


QUESTION: In regards to your living wage policy, can you clarify who the 1.2 million workers you promised a pay rise are? Where did you get this figure from and can you explain who exactly it is, given that 180,000 workers are on the adult minimum wage?
ANSWER: No. And the point about it is that she is a strong person. Anyone that knows Melissa knows she makes her own decisions. Having said that, in terms of what she has actually said I wasn't there. I am not saying she is wrong, I am not saying she is right.


QUESTION: Have you or any of our colleagues spoken to Sam Dastyari about today's pathology announcement?
ANSWER: No, she has strong views. I like Melissa. It didn't work out on this occasion. But I am not one of those people that is going to … I like my team and I think that politics is better suited when you say positive things rather than everyone piles in.


QUESTION: But can I bring you back to the question?
ANSWER: No, he supports party policy and that is our party policy, a two-state solution - the right of Israel to exist behind secure borders but also recognising the legitimate aspirations of Palestinian people to their own country.


QUESTION: You haven’t answered whether your colleagues have spoken to him.
ANSWER: Who gets on the front bench is ultimately decided by the Caucus. But I think all things being equal that would be the case, yes.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten there's been allegations that that Liberal Party's candidate in Chisholm made homophobic comments. Does she need to apologise and does the Prime Minister need to intervene?
ANSWER: Well I have to let the Caucus members have a say, I don't run a top-down organisation, but I think personally Pat Dodson is an outstanding Australian, an outstanding West Australian. I personally approached him to run for the Senate and you know any room that he is in everyone else in the room always feel a bit better because he is such a significant father of reconciliation.


QUESTION: Can you rule out no new or increased taxes on superannuation?
ANSWER: Well we are going to review it. First things first - I do think Newstart is too low. And the Government, they’re not going to do anything about it. What we want to do is review it, we want to see the interaction with the other benefits which people get, the tax and transfer system. But we are not reviewing it to lower it.


QUESTION: That’s different from ruling it out though.
ANSWER: I will let the review look at all of those issues, that is a legitimate issue. I think that some conservatives say that you should only be temporarily unemployed therefore keep it low and that way it gives incentive for people to get off it, but I don't think keeping it so low actually achieves anything other than is unfair to people very down on their luck.


QUESTION: So will you rule it out?
ANSWER: We are up for reviewing it and we want to review it positively.


QUESTION: You have spoken almost exclusively since your budget in reply speech and focused on health. When can voters learn more about Labor's emission reduction target, how you will get there and the cost to the economy?
ANSWER: We get into the adjectives game, what I can say is it is too low.


QUESTION: Some of your staffers have said the same in private conversations.
ANSWER: I think it is a range, I don't think it's one stereotype at all. You get people who are older who, the factory closes, they are thrown all of a sudden on the scrap heap and told they are not worth something. You could have young people. Youth unemployment is pretty significant in parts of Australia and of course unemployment in the west is a challenge.


QUESTION: You didn't answer the question. Answer the question, when can people know, Mr Shorten, the cost to the economy. You didn't answer the question. You should answer the question. That's why we're here to ask questions, why can't you answer the question?
ANSWER: I think there is disillusionment with institutions generally. I don't think a lot of people trust the media. Now I do think they trust the ABC that is why, for example, we have committed to an independent public broadcaster. But I think institutions generally including politicians are viewed sceptically, that there is this view that we are all just in it to look after ourselves and not the people. I'd have to say to people who get frustrated, we've decided to go first, we've got to trust the Australian people. We have put our policies out there. Now the very fact that we are having such a conversation, we are looking to the future on climate change, or we are focused on better health care not bigger tax loopholes, the fact that we are looking at unsustainable tax concessions, and saying can this nation keep going down this road of intergenerational unfairness where you look after people at one end and everyone else is not looked after. So we are taking the first step to rebuild trust by putting our policies out there. In politics traditionally, the argument goes when you are the opposition be a small target, let the Government fall over. Now this Government is hopelessly divided. Anyone who thinks they're going to unite after the election has no idea of the deep level of hate within this Government and dysfunction and chaos. But having said that we have to rebuild trust and that is why we're putting our policies out there. That is why for instance I have been to Western Australia for 80 days as opposition leader. I do what I call Town Hall meetings. We invite a whole suburb. Doesn't matter your politics, doesn't matter if you want to protest, doesn't matter if you have a grievance at the system or individuals we invite you to come along. I know that anyone that has been to our Town Halls likes what they hear. What I have got to do perhaps is have this longer form discussion than little gotcha conversations at eight seconds at a press conference which doesn't really add much to the sum of human knowledge does it?


QUESTION: Why won't you answer the question, Mr Shorten?
ANSWER: My preference is questions from the audience, just direct. The media, of course, should be invited, they can film the interplay. My view is that the more that I can talk directly to the people the better our case goes.


QUESTION: On pathology, nine out of 10 pathology blood tests are done out of hospitals. 99 per cent of those are bulk billed. How can you say the system’s at breaking point when the rate is at 99 per cent? And can you guarantee this $200 million will not just fill the bottom lines of pathology companies?
ANSWER: Lovely thank you very much for your interest.


QUESTION: Surely pathology companies come to you and say we want more money, do you just roll over and accept that argument without scrutiny, and is that  the process that applies to other industries as well?
ANSWER: Thank you very much. Welcome words from the peak association representing pathology in Australia. Are there questions?


QUESTION: But hasn't the government done a better job? It was 97 per cent in 2013, when you guys left office, and it's above 99 per cent now?
ANSWER: None that I can think of. Just on the Sharrouf children, they shouldn't be a political football. They have already suffered. Incredibly irresponsibly, their parents took them to a war zone. Their parents took them into a regime of terrorism. But these children shouldn't be held responsible for what their parents did.


QUESTION: If it remains high today, how can you say it's at breaking point?	ANSWER: Yes. We're updating the documents. I mean let's face it, if you want to talk about putting policies upfront, we're doing that. We put our negative gearing policy out from the Sydney Town Hall in about February, March, of 2016. As new numbers come to light, we update them. So, I think if you want to look at the gold standard in terms of putting policies out there, I don't think any of you can really look past Labor. But if you want to look at what is not the gold standard, have a look at this very important report the Grattan Institute has written today. I would encourage you all to read it. It has some real information there. What it shows is the Liberals' economic model on display yet again. It shows that for tax cuts on the never-never, they are planning though to cut up to $40 billion a year in secret cuts. The Government will have to
answer during the course of this campaign. What are the secret cuts you're planning to promise an illusory tax increase in half a decade’s time?


QUESTION: Could I ask on those 90 excluded pages re your capital gains and negative gearing changes, you say there are new assumptions, so they need updating, which is a very fine thing. How do the assumptions change the costings on those two programs, and assuming that they're not affected, would you release the 90 pages so we can have a look?
ANSWER: Restore?


QUESTION: Mr Shorten in Boothby do you support the South Australian government's plans for the Repat general hospital, and if so will you match the $35 million in Coalition funding pledged?
ANSWER: I’m not going to start giving security advice, I’ll leave that to the security agencies.


QUESTION: Yes please.
ANSWER: Well first of all, you’ll find that about well over a million people are award-dependent. And so they're the people I'm talking about. If you improve the living wage, if you improve the minimum wage to a living wage, then we want to eventually see that flow through to the people who are still reliant on the award system. That number’s bigger than 100,000 people. But let’s, you know I get where the question’s coming from, and it's really about this ongoing boast that Mr Morrison keeps saying about a strong economy. Let's unpack what a Liberal strong economy is based upon. It's based upon two principles. The first is keep wages as low as possible, and they're proud of that, and keep making sure that the profits go up and up. This Government has an almost religious conviction that if you can make the richest people in Australia richer, the richest companies in Australia richer, then eventually some of the crumbs will fall off the table. So that's the first leg of the principles of Mr Morrison's strong economy, keep wages down. The second leg though, and the Grattan Institute’s blown the whistle on this again today, is that the number two method that this Government believes keeps a strong economy, is by reducing real spending on essential services that working Australians require. TAFE, universities, child care, health care. These are the services which working Australians and Australians depend upon. If that’s what Mr Morrison calls a strong economy – low wages and reduction in real services – then that's not the strong economy Australia needs. Labor, by contrast, believes in a strong economy built upon fairness and decency. And we are not going to stand by and watch Mr Morrison boast about a strategy which sees the rich get richer, and everyone else just miss out. Where the cost of living is squeezing millions of wage earners.


QUESTION: The health minister here says they haven't heard from Labor at all on this issue.	ANSWER: I haven't. And indeed, this pathology announcement stands on its own two feet, doesn’t it? When you think about it, and I will get Catherine to supplement the
answer, pathology makes sick people well. It has that potential. When you're in the fight of your life, you know, 100 per cent of cancer needs pathology. So I understand if perhaps the Government doesn't like the fact that we're leading on health care as we do, but the experts tell us there is a problem, that that bulk billing levels of pathology are under pressure. As I said earlier, but I think it's a pretty fair point, one of the great strengths of our medical system, is that doctors can recommend tests and they’re very confident that it’s not going to put added financial pressure on patients. I want to preserve that system but the problem is, and Catherine can talk at more length, 140,000 Australians now annually are recorded as not being, taking their pathology tests because they can't afford to. But I might hand over to Catherine for a moment.


QUESTION: In terms of the Sharrouf children, is there anything more the Government should be doing there, and if they do come home are there particular measures that you would like to see in place to make sure they're not some kind of threat?
ANSWER: Yeah, but I’ll let Catherine talk more about her announcement first.


QUESTION: South Australian irrigators have been told over the last 24 hours they will only get 14 per cent of the allocation which they were hoping they would get. They feared they might get 50 per cent, they were hoping to get 100 per cent. What is Labor's plan to fix the Murray and does it include or could it include resparking up this $2.2 billion desalination plant that we have here?
ANSWER: Sorry, I will come to you, Jade.


QUESTION: Will you sack the CFMEU's Michael Ravbar from the Labor national executive now he's been fined by the Federal Court?
ANSWER: Well I think it will be very interesting to see how Mr Morrison handles this rogue candidate in Chisholm. It’ll be very interesting indeed to see how he handles it because he needs to make up his mind on a couple of questions. One, whether he wants as a candidate for the Liberal Party someone who’s said such hurtful things about her fellow Australians, and two, whether he wants as a candidate for the Liberal Party someone who stood in front of the media and said it didn't happen when clearly it did. This will be a test for him to see how he handles it in coming days.


QUESTION: Do you think it's appropriate that Sam Dastyari's employer will make a motza out of today's announcement?
ANSWER: We have no plans to increase taxes on superannuation.


QUESTION: On the weekend you made some very strong comments about people spending more than $3,000 managing tax affairs, you said it was a loophole and a rort. Are you surprised organisations like the CPA and the Institute of Public accountants are making such partisan opposition to that during the election campaign? Usually they would be a bit less in the thick of the political campaign.
ANSWER: We have no plans to introduce any new taxes on superannuation.


QUESTION: [inaudible]
ANSWER: Sure.


QUESTION: So if restoration were a decision for a Shorten Government to take, what would you do?
ANSWER: First of all I haven’t spoken exclusively about health.


QUESTION: Before we let you go this morning, there is a report that the Government's numbers, as such,a Grattan Institute examination suggests that it could be $40 billion a year short on its surplus unless it picks – or cuts in harder with taxes or something, or spending cuts to pay the difference, your response?
ANSWER: I don't know what private conversations you have with people or what you want to reveal. But let me go to the record – I just said four minutes ago Mr Morrison loves to boast about his strong economy. I'm pretty sure we were all here when I said that. But let me say it again, because it's a good point to make. Mr Morrison loves to boast about his strong economy. But his strong economy is your classic Liberal strong economy, it's built upon two propositions, one, low wages, they're proud of it. They almost have a religious fervour, don't they, about being happy when the wages are low and corporate profits are up. Did you know that since the last election, corporate profits have gone up 39 per cent? But in fact wages have moved on average 5 per cent. And the second leg that he relies upon for this Liberal strong economy is the reduction, the reduction in real spending on services. In particular, health, but also I mentioned education, I mentioned TAFE. I mentioned childcare. The problem for Australia is that a Liberal strong economy relies on the mythical belief that if the biggest corporations in Australia make a lot of money, if the richest people in Australia can pay less tax through the loopholes, that miraculously everyone else benefits. That hasn't been the lived experience. Labor has a different view about what creates a strong economy. What creates a strong economy is fairness and decency.


QUESTION: Finally, were you surprised by that? Did that shock you or were those numbers you'd seen in the Budget and expected?
ANSWER: I'm going to give your colleagues half a go.


QUESTION: Firstly, tell us why you’re here today?
ANSWER: Dan, I'm going to go to you.


QUESTION: We have been asking our listeners this morning, Mr Shorten, to text through questions for you. I’d like to read you this text from Tim. He says “I’m really worried as a small businessman I’ve watched my business go from 15 staff to five since the McGowan government came to power and our local Albany economy has gone into freefall. Things are only going to get worse under a new government obsessed with all things green. When are you going to explain how your climate change policies will impact the economy?”
ANSWER: Well, I’ll just refer to you the Institute of Health and Welfare saying that 140,000 of our fellow Australians already are delaying or not having pathology tests because of the costs. But I might get Catherine to talk about how this is an important addition to protecting and preserving our existing system.


QUESTION: People are looking at the hiccups and stumbles at a time like this when you are focusing on an upcoming election, and such was the case yesterday afternoon, where you were seen to not answer a question that was asked by a journalist, and we have another question from a listener from Owen, asking what are the costings for your renewables and greenhouse gas emission policies, you owe it to the people of Australia to be transparent on this.
ANSWER: Listen, I think the original question comes from a story I read in the Fin by Nicholas Lenaghan, and then it was followed up by a question here. We've said, and I went and checked when I saw the story, said how come this page is down, they said they're updating it. I can't add any more at this point.


QUESTION: So the costs are the same?
ANSWER: Yes, we will. Do you want a little more detail than yes?


QUESTION: I mean, the thing with these climate change policies, these policies take time. You know, natural disasters are not going to stop the moment a good policy is agreed to.
ANSWER: I will just keep moving around. Jade, did you want to ask a question?


QUESTION: No, but it may take a century to recover from that situation.
ANSWER: Listen, I don’t want to second guess the Government on this. These kids should not be a political football. Obviously the grandmother has worked very hard to try and see these children's welfare is put back up the top of the charts. But I'm not going to engage in criticism of the Government when I'm unaware of exactly what they have done. In terms of what happens when they come back, the experts will be looking at it, but I have got no doubt there's a fair bit of trauma there. I don't know any of us could imagine if our kids were dragged to those war zones and terror zones and we've all seen some of the images of what Sharrouf exposed his kids too. These kids need to be given a little bit of room and a lot of love. Probably if they can get a lot of love then I suspect that will be the best way to help reabsorb them into Australian life.


QUESTION: Vote Compass is the online tool that ABC is using during the election campaign to gauge Australians’ views on the policies, taking the personalities out of it. The number one issue here in Western Australia is not the environment, but the economy, and that is the concern, and that is where they don’t trust you.
ANSWER: Well first of all there are no jobs on a dead river. And South Australia has been handed the rough edge of the pineapple when it comes to the current Federal Government. Labor put in place the plan for the basin, getting the balance right between river survival and therefore job survival and fish survival, and ecological survival, and agricultural needs. There’s no doubt to my mind that for anyone who cares about the future of the Murray-Darling Basin, anyone who lives in South Australia, anyone who is concerned about the fish kills that we saw this January and over the Christmas holidays, this Government has failed. So we want to put the Basin Plan back on top. Obviously we want to bring all the stakeholders together, including South Australia, southern irrigators and northern irrigators, because at the moment, this is an ecological disaster and the story in The Advertiser really spelt that out pretty clearly I think.


QUESTION: But electric cars actually cost more, at the moment.
ANSWER: Listen, that will be a matter for the national executive. No-one is above the law. Unionist, banker, Clive Palmer. No-one is above the law. But in terms of the national executive matters, I will leave that to the Labor Party.


QUESTION: (laughs) Not seeing what’s coming down over the road is quite an amazing analogy because I don’t think even you could have realised that electric cars were going to be the hot spot that it is. But the hot button issue –
ANSWER: Well first of all, Mr Dastyari is no longer a senator. He paid a pretty big price, I think, for mistakes he made. I'm not about to get – he's got a right to a life after politics, as I think all political people do. But I’ve just got to go to this issue of pathology. Is the Government really arguing that we shouldn't be investing more in pathology? Is the Government really arguing that we shouldn't put downward pressure on the cost of pathology so that we can make sure that we maintain our bulk billing system? If they are arguing that then they are more out of touch than I originally thought. Thanks, everyone.


QUESTION: Every time we talk about it, we get loads of people talking about it, for and against.
ANSWER: I think our CPAs are excellent. Love accountants. I notice there was the usual propaganda from News Limited which said that we are against the professions. We’re not. But really, in this country, can we afford to be giving away millions of dollars of tax subsidy to people for the cost of minimising their tax already? I mean we are talking about the taxes which nurses and tradies pay to Canberra. I would rather use that taxpayer money for the best schools in the world, for the best TAFE, for the best aged care, for the best health care system. It is a matter of priorities. Am I surprised that a vested interest whose business model relies upon tax subsidies isn't happy if we are going to reform it? No. I get why they might not like it. But we’ve got to ask ourselves in this country, are we just a country who wants to maintain tax subsidies and loopholes for the big end of town, or are we a country who wants to invest in our people? At the end of the day, we are not changing the ability of accountants to do work for their customers. We are just saying that perhaps once you are paying over $3,000 a year to an accountant you shouldn't be able to deduct that off your tax. It is not, it is not how it has been characterised in News Limited and I expect to see more of these dishonest scare campaigns about Labor. But at some point the political process in this country has got to put ordinary people back at the top of the pile. We’ve got to start saying, “Do you want your kids not to be able to get all the classes they need, be they kids who need special needs, or be they kids who need extensions and advancements in their class?” Do we want to be a country who can't afford to be alongside you when you are in the fight of your life on cancer? Do we want to be a country who does nothing on climate change? Do we want to be a country who just says, well, we'd rather give a tax subsidy to someone claiming $1 million and let them write that off their tax when they have already minimised their tax beyond that? It’s all about choices and values. We want to run an economy which is fair and decent, not one which supports lower wages and cuts to real services.


QUESTION: But you would rather they didn’t.
ANSWER: I've been there, I remember when I first was a young backpacker it was one of the – in the time before GPS, Notre Dame was one of the ways you would navigate around Paris, on the island in the middle of the Seine. More recently, I remember running through the early morning streets, doing a run through Paris, and you run past the brooding, gothic cathedral that is Notre Dame.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten is our guest, I beg your pardon, on ABC Radio Perth and WA, the Leader of the Opposition. Let’s go back to questions from our listeners.
ANSWER: I think it's worth Australia investing in the restoration of Notre Dame. Notre Dame doesn't just belong to Paris or France, it belongs to the world.


QUESTION: A lot of people make the point that $3000 or $2500 is what pays for their health insurance every year, they make arrangements years in advance based on what you call a gift so why don't you grandfather these arrangements?
ANSWER: The whistle has been blown on the Government's secret cuts to spending in the Budget. This Government is promising tax cuts in five years’ time for some people, but it's doing it on the basis of $40 billion worth of cuts. The secret’s out, this is a government with secret cuts to spending in its Budget to fund its promises on the never-never, for tax cuts.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten there are a number of tightly held seats in Western Australia that you're fighting over at the moment. There are some that you would give up on and one of them would be Curtin but you did play a surprise hand I guess when came to delivering a candidate to Curtin for the ALP, and with it looked like the aim of disruption I guess, Melissa Parke, I am talking about and she of course now has stood down as the candidate for the ALP for the seat of Curtin over, some people would say, embarrassing comments that she made claiming that a Palestinian woman was forced to drink bleach at the Israeli border. How do you feel about the remarks and your decision to endorse her in the first place?
ANSWER: This government has form. They've never seen an education or health profile that they didn't want to cut the spending to. What this means for every day Australians is that the problems we've seen with increasing costs of healthcare, longer waiting lists, underfunded schools – the Liberals have form.


QUESTION: So you didn't ask her to stand down?
ANSWER: Anzac Day is arguably Australia's sacred day. It doesn't matter if you're of any faith or none, it is a day where the whole nation stops to reflect upon the courage of young Australian men 104 years ago and all of the service by all of the women and men of the Defence Forces and their families since then.


QUESTION: Are you embarrassed by it?
ANSWER: Thanks Cathy. Today, we are focused on local workers, better wages and better jobs for Queenslanders and for Australians. My message to the Australian wage earners, to millions of middle class and working class Australians is that May 18th, and the vote on May 18th, is the last chance for three years to get wages moving, to reverse the cuts to penalty rates, to do something about reforming long term permanent casuals, to make sure that we clamp down on rorts in 457 visas, to reform labour hire. My message is that on May 18th it is your last chance for three years. Because if the current mob are returned, the divided, dysfunctional anti-worker government mob we currently have in Canberra are returned, they are going to take an election victory as a green light to continue for the next three years in the same ramshackle, pro top end of town manner, which they have been doing for the last six years and that hasn’t helped Australian workers. We want to stand up for Australian workers. We want to make sure they get better pay and better quality of work. This Government just wants to cut schools and hospitals, cut penalty rates, so they can give tax cuts to the top end of town. What I would like to do is ask Jason Clare to talk about our exciting infrastructure announcements and talk about a few of the issues we have just gone through.


QUESTION: And now Josh Wilson supports a two-state solution in Israel and that is also causing you some tension?
ANSWER: Thanks. That was Zac Beers, Labor's candidate here in Flynn, very energetic.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, will any elected WA Labor members make their way onto a Government front bench if you win?
ANSWER: Thanks, that is Elida Faith, Labor’s candidate running in Leichhardt. Before we get onto the exciting new announcements that we are making for tourism and the bush around Australia and protecting the reef I think it is important that my first comments go towards yet again, expressing my and Labor's solidarity with the people of Sri Lanka, my and Labor's solidarity with Sri Lankan Australians. Chloe and I were at church in Brisbane yesterday like many hundreds of thousands of Australians. Like many tens and hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankan worshippers. It is unthinkable that people at prayer should be the subject of this cowardly terror attack. And we stand with Sri Lankan Australians, they're a mighty community, and we stand with Sri Lanka. I had the opportunity to talk to a family down at the ticket box at the start of the Skyrail. They're very proud Sri Lankan Australians, a family with a daughter. They know they live in a great country Australia because it is so safe, but they expressed their sadness, their family are okay back in Colombo. But their sadness, they thought that after 20 years of war, this violence and terror was behind them in Sri Lanka and that tourism was up. Clearly, there are always evil people amongst us who seek to drag people back into shocking violence and our solidarity and sympathy is with the people of Sri Lanka.


QUESTION: Pat Dodson?
ANSWER: First of all, the McKibbin report is publicly available, and of course we’ve relied upon it in part, but let's also go further here. You all know what the government's doing. This has been a ten year torture on climate change, where the climate has got worse, the extreme weather events have got worse, and this government is still trying to delay and discourage. Here is a bet, here’s a bet I'll make you. Future generations are going to despise the politicians right now who refuse to take action on climate change.


QUESTION: We have watched the Budget and your reply very, very closely. Why is the Newstart allowance, an increase, not an ALP commitment?
ANSWER: Yes. I was in Proserpine in January, doing one of my many visits to regional Queensland and after, I forget which particular scare campaign the government had whistled up, I said I bet you this government is so desperate, they will try and create a ridiculous death tax scare. Well, you know, truth imitates our press conferences there. They did exactly that. It is a lie. It is a lie. It is a lie. And I think the Liberal Party need to be ashamed of themselves using low rent, American-style fake news which is actually a lie and then trying to scare different communities in Australia.


QUESTION: Would you look at changing it so that it, the annual indexation is similar to what happens with the pension?	ANSWER: This water scandal is really, really, really starting to come to light, isn't it? This was the nation's biggest water purchase, the most expensive water purchase and now we're seeing question marks about the probity of it. You have got the particular minister, Mr Taylor. You know, he used to make a living from working with this company, goes into parliament and then the company gets a super contract. A lot more questions to
answer here. And by the way, why this is relevant to the Australian people is this is a lot of taxpayer money. Probity questions as far as the eye can see. But even more importantly than that, our river system is stuffed and it is stuffed because this is a government who hasn't had a plan to look after the whole of the river basin. It has played favourites. It has pursued particular commercial agendas, and as a result, Australia's mighty Murray-Darling is on the critical list. This is the problem. That's why we should have a national anti-corruption commission too.


QUESTION: It makes a lot of people very sad...	ANSWER: Produce all the documents. All the documents. You have got to
answer: is this the right process? I think I would be interested to hear if Mr Turnbull, former Prime Minister Turnbull, knew what his ministers were doing or whether or not they were going rogue? I do think that this is an inquiry which today the Prime Minister needs to say one thing: is he completely confident that everything is above board? Is he going to stake his reputation on whether or not all of these matters have been done above board? And if he is, then he needs to come clean with all of the detail.


QUESTION: Substantially, I mean I know you can't commit but it needs a good hike...
ANSWER: Thanks very much Luke. Well, great to be back in Darwin again and the weather’s fantastic. The Territory’s a very exciting place but it deserves a government in Canberra who will get behind the aspirations and dreams of the people of the Territory. Today in particular, I’m really pleased to announce that a Labor Government, if elected, will invest $115 million to improve the health outcomes of our First Australians. We should be a country who ensures that our First Australians have the same health outcomes as other Australians. We want to Close the Gap. Now I understand that talking about Indigenous health mightn't change an election, but it can change the nation. This country has to be the best we can be in the way that we offer the same opportunities to all Australians. When First Australians have lesser health outcomes, then all of Australia is diminished. Our job as the Labor Party is to fight for all Australians and that's what we're doing today with $115 million in an exciting health package to assist Indigenous Australians. I'd now like to hand over to Catherine King to talk further about this important announcement.


QUESTION: Who do you imagine is on Newstart when you picture it in your mind's eye?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody, I am really pleased to be back at this hospital. But I am even more pleased to be making an exciting announcement. If Labor is elected, we will provide $20 million to help with more clinical trials and make them available to people diagnosed with blood cancers and leukaemia. Leukaemia shouldn't be a death sentence. If you can't access a trial, then potentially the inability to access that trial becomes a death sentence. 6,700 of our fellow Australians will die this year due to blood cancers. This $20 million is so important to assist. I have a very good friend who passed a couple of years ago. I miss him. He died of leukaemia. For years he fought it. I don't want to see other people die when we could have prevented it. That's why this is such an important announcement. $20 million to help people in the fight of their lives get access to more treatment. This will save lives. I'll hand over to Catherine King to talk more about this great announcement and how we're going to help close the gap in health care between the west and the east.


QUESTION: We've been asking our listeners over the last couple of weeks about trust in regard to politicians and in particular who they trust more, you or Scott Morrison. 22 per cent of our listeners who took part in our survey said they didn't trust either of you. Do you accept that voters are switching off?
ANSWER: Thanks Nadia. Good afternoon everybody, it’s great to be here in South Australia in the seat of Boothby with our very capable candidate Nadia Clancy. Today Catherine and I are pleased to announce a significant new investment in pathology testing in Australia. We accept the argument that Australian pathologists have put to us that the system is near breaking in terms of bulk billing. That without a significant injection of new funds, that we could be jeopardising the wide take up of bulk billing for pathology tests. Now one of the great things about our healthcare system in Australia, is that when a doctor prescribes a blood test they can do so knowing that they’re not putting financial pressure on our patients, that the system can afford the tests which patients need to help with the treatment that they require. But at the moment in Australia, it's estimated by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, that in fact 140,000 of our fellow Australians is currently not taking pathology tests because of the cost. Our system of bulk billing should not be jeopardised because of under-investment in pathology. We need these tests when people are in the fight of their lives. So Labor will invest $200 million so that we can keep the high rates of bulk billing and pathology where they are. I’d now like to invite Catherine to talk a bit further and then we'll be happy to take questions.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten just a final question for you talking about town halls, we read today that you have agreed with the Prime Minister Scott Morrison to a debate here in Perth on the April 29. Can you tell us what the arrangement of that is. Will it be a town hall-style debate? Will it be a more formal debate? Will there be questions from the audience or limited journos?
ANSWER: [Audio cuts in] I imagine we would feel if Sydney – if the Opera House was to catch fire or Sydney Harbour Bridge. It's devastating for the world.


QUESTION: Thank you very much for your time.
ANSWER: Thanks, that was Josh Burns, Labor's candidate for Macnamara. First of all it is great, on an Easter Saturday to be with my family at Luna Park. This is an icon. It’s been continuously in operation for 107 years. What that also reminds me is that all of us over this Easter break are very lucky to have people turning up to work. People who serve us our meals in the hotels, people who look after our rooms in our accommodation if we are travelling away from home. The people indeed who provide the pharmacy work and the shops, the things which we take for granted. Right around Australia there are millions of people working had so the rest of us can enjoy ourselves. That is why we should keep paying people their penalty rates and not arbitrarily cut them. It has been estimated that over this 10 day Easter break, Anzac Day period the workers who have had their penalty rates cut will be losing, in this 10 day period, between $220 and $370 depending which award they are covered by. This is hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians who are working over this 10 day period have literally had up to $370 cut from their pay. This government could have changed that. Not only does this government cut funding to schools, not only does this government cut funding to hospitals, but they also, to show how callous they are, have acquiesced in the cutting of penalty rates. On eight occasions Labor put to the government in a vote, let’s restore the cuts to penalty rates. Eight times Mr Morrison and his team of cutters supported the cuts to penalty rates for the lowest paid workers, young workers, women workers. This is a government that not only doesn’t get it, it just doesn’t care. The finance services minister Mr Cormann put his hand up and he said we support the low wages architecture of Australia. They support cutting penalty rates. Well, there couldn't be a clearer choice in this election. I've said previously this election is an election, it is a referendum on wages. Everything is going up in Australia except people's wages. And the rot stops when we reverse the cuts to penalty rates. We, at our very first piece of legislation, if we get elected, will be to restore the cuts, to replace the cuts, to return the penalty rates back to the workers of Australia. That's what we're going to do first off. We’ve got a plan for wages. All Mr Morrison has is a plan for cuts. Cuts to schools, cuts to hospitals and perhaps worst of all, cuts to people's penalty rates. I would now like to hand over to Brendan O'Connor to talk further about our wages policy, our plan for a fair go for wages, then take questions.


QUESTION: Look, this is the first time we've spoken to you since the election was called. The first Newspoll of the campaign has you well ahead of Scott Morrison: 52-48 two party preferred. Based on that, it would be a landslide to Labor. Is this your election to lose?
ANSWER: Oh listen, I think all of us were shocked to see that image. Notre Dame is a global icon. I don't know how many people here, but certainly I and millions of Australians over the years have backpacked or travelled to Paris, and one of those postcard moments of any young Australian's trip overseas is to go to Notre Dame. Notre Dame’s an 800-year-old cathedral. It has survived civil war and religious strife, German occupation. So I think a lot of us were really sad and shocked to see what has happened today. I mean for Australians, imagine if we saw the Opera House on fire. And that is essentially what we have seen in France. And Notre Dame therefore doesn’t just belong to Paris or France, it belongs to the world. I like Mr Turnbull's idea that there should be some modest commitment to help rebuild, if that is the case, and that’s what friends are for. And I would encourage Mr Morrison to take up mine and Mr Turnbull's idea.


QUESTION: All right. While we've got you Bill Shorten, the children of notorious terrorist Khaled Sharrouf have pleaded to be allowed to come back home to Australia after years living in Islamic State territory. Their grandma told Four Corners program on the ABC last night they pose no threat to Australia. If you were Prime Minister, would you let them back in?
ANSWER: I'd say last week, the Government said there wasn't a problem with cancer funding, they said it's all free. This week, now they're saying we're not spending enough.


QUESTION: But you'd like them back in?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody. It’s great to be here at Casey Hospital in Melbourne’s south eastern suburbs. You were just hearing from Simon Curtis, Labor’s candidate for La Trobe. I’m really pleased to announce that a Labor Government, if elected on May 18, will contribute an additional $250 million to help reduce waiting lists for elective surgery in this country. I just want to unpack that term waiting lists for a moment. It sort of sounds benign doesn’t it, the word waiting lists, the words waiting lists, it’s like waiting for a spot in a restaurant. But waiting lists in the health context are anything but benign. I just got to catch up with a gentleman called Leigh, his father’s been waiting and he’s now had a double knee replacement and a double hip replacement. That waiting time is painful. When we talk about waiting lists increasing 10 per cent under the Liberal National Government in Canberra, what that means, is it means a lot of our fellow Australians, hundreds of thousands of them, are waiting longer to have painful, painful surgery resolved.


QUESTION: Yep. All right Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us.
ANSWER: Thanks Anne and good morning everybody. It’s great to be here on the Central Coast. I’m feeling a little bit of parent guilt. I’m a netball dad, I love seeing netball and my own daughters play it. We’re here today though for a very good purpose. Australia is the skin cancer capital of the world. Two out of every three Australians by the time they're 70 will get a diagnosis of skin cancer. Even worse, over 2,000 Australians will die this year because of skin cancer-related illnesses. And the thing about skin cancer, unlike perhaps some of the other cancers, is it's almost entirely preventable. I think it is very clever when Anne Charlton and the team suggested coming here because what these young girls who are playing netball are told every day by their parents when they go out to play netball is make sure that you put on some sunscreen. That's what Chloe always tells our kids when they walk out the door. But it is now overdue for the nation to take a guide from the parents of Australia and have a national campaign to tackle skin cancer by preventing it. This is one cancer where we can actually have a massive impact through sensible prevention. It has been over 10 years since the nation has had a national campaign to encourage young people - all Australians in fact - to slip, slop, slap. So today we're announcing, in conjunction with the Cancer Council, Slip, Slop, Slap 2.0. After a decade of inaction we now want to have a national advertising campaign to encourage Australians to take preventive action when they go out into the sun. We don't have to be the skin cancer capital of the world. It's up to us to prevent it. We've learnt a lot in recent decades but it is now time, just as we have done with our tobacco prevention campaigns, just as we’ve done with the rest of our packages to fight the scourge of cancer. It’s now time after a decade of not taking action, to have a national Slip, Slop, Slap campaign 2.0. I would like to invite Catherine King to talk further and then we will have a guest from the Cancer Council to talk even more about what we're going to do.


QUESTION: This new Medicare item number that Labor is proposing, why would a doctor accept a fee that's lower than what they can currently receive with the Medicare rebate they get plus the out-of-pocket they can get from a patient?
ANSWER: Thanks, Brian Owler, Labor’s candidate in Bennelong, and Catherine and I have both found Brian a great source of advice and insight about our cancer Medicare package and we look forward, if Catherine’s the Health Minister and I get elected, of using Brian’s skills in government. First of all can I just thank the Avner Institute. This is a very important visit. It’s important because it reminds us all, the marvellous travelling media gallery we’ve got with us and politicians like ourselves. Reminds us what this election’s really about. Nothing is more important than family and health care. Today we're announcing $125 million for more cancer research. We’re here at the Avner Institute as pancreatic cancer is such a challenging cancer. We’re here because we want to provide $20 million to help reinforce the marvellous work they’re doing here.


QUESTION: In regards to hospitals funding, Mr Shorten, will you commit to restoring federal funding for hospitals to a 50-50 split with the states, even if that ratio, 50 per cent, is more than $2.8 billion?
ANSWER: No, Deb. It's great to be on your show this morning. As for where I campaign, I campaign over all of Australia because I think Australians are sick of politics as usual. I don't view Australia as Liberal or Labor, I just view it as Australia and we have all got the same challenges. Everything is going up except your wages. We have had six years of massive instability in the Government and people just want to see proper investment in their kids' education. Making sure that when you're sick it's your Medicare card, not your credit card that determines your level of health. They want action on climate change. So, we are about cost of living and that's why I started in a suburban backyard because that's where Australia is. It's the families around the dinner table wondering what the future is going to hold and how Labor can help them look after their family and their health.


QUESTION: You say that the cancer plan is about boosting competition, but haven't you given the impression to voters that all cancer treatment will be free if you're elected?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody. Great to be here in Mitcham with Shireen Morris, and of course my remarkable Deputy, Tanya Plibersek.


QUESTION: The Government tells us, right or wrong, that funding for this local area health network is up 89 per cent on 2012-13. Now that figure might be wrong, I can't vouch for that. Can you tell us, is the funding is up almost 90 per cent and if so, haven't you just walked into an example of actually pretty good government commitment to health?
ANSWER: Thank you, Justine. It's great to be back in Ballina, great to be back on the North Coast for Patrick and Justine, Labor's North Coast team for the federal election. I'd like to acknowledge North Coast Radiology for hosting us at the visit. But in particular, before I get into our exciting announcement, I just want to thank Carolyn and Marilyn for taking the time to tell me about their stories.


QUESTION: Is health spending here at record levels, Mr Shorten, or is it not? It is a simple question - it is or it isn't?
ANSWER: Thanks, Russell. Great to be here with 5th generation coal miner Russell Robertson, Labor's standard bearer in the upcoming Capricornia election. I am also here with Zac Beers who is running for the seat just south of Capricornia he is running in Flynn and he lives in Gladstone. He started on the tools, he has been a representative of workers, I've got a couple of great candidates in Central Queensland here. We've been at Hastings Deerings today, Hasting Deering's is a very good company. It employs apprentices, it is bucking the trend. It is one of the biggest employers of diesel fitters in the nation. But what I see here, we could see in a thousand workshops right across Central Queensland and the whole of Australia. I want Australia to go back to being a tradie nation, 1.6 million of our fellow Australians got a trade qualification, my father was a fitter and turner. But what we have seen under the LNP Government is we've seen a virtual destruction of so many apprenticeship positions. A lot of people I think are surprised to learn that under the Liberals we have seen the Liberal-Nationals, we have seen 150,000 fewer apprenticeships now than there were six years ago. But not to worry, Labor at the next election is presenting an exciting future for the trades. What we are going to do is pay the upfront fees for 100,000 apprentices over the next three years.. Maybe some of the young TA’s here who are seeking to get apprenticeships next year will be able to benefit from our fee support. And by the way we’re paying the fees, we’re not giving them a loan and asking for it back, this is just a grant. Also what we said last week in our Budget reply is that we want to give some subsidies to employers – not a king’s ransom, but a certain amount, a few thousand dollars - to help provide the incentive to employ apprentices to give them their first start. In your first and second year, apprentices are doing more learning than they are contributing to the bottom line of a business, but we’ve got to invest in our young, and we’ve got to invest in adults seeking to retrain. So we’ve got a great plan for apprenticeships. Pay upfront fees, work with employers, but also in Central Queensland, we’ve got an ambitious set of infrastructure works.


QUESTION: Is it at record levels or not?
ANSWER: Thanks Zac. It's great to be here with Catherine King, our Shadow Health Spokesperson and Zac Beers our Candidate in Flynn. It's great to be back in Queensland frankly. I spent more than 100 days here since the last election in 2016. I've had the opportunity to spend 50 days in regional Queensland. In fact, since I became Leader, this is now my 10th visit to Gladstone. So, I've had the opportunity to talk to people in Gladstone, to listen to the staff who work here and patients who work at this fantastic hospital and I've got the message loud and clear from Gladstone. Take away all the other nonsense of politics, a number one issue for people in Gladstone is access to quality healthcare. At the end of the day, the most important things in your life are your family and your health. If you've got those, then everything else is you know, an added bonus. But if you don't have them then everything else is very bleak indeed.


QUESTION: You keep dodging the question by not answering it, so is it at record levels or not. Because this is one of the confounding issues over the election campaign over whether you say there is more money on education or health or whether the Government says there is record levels on education and health. Simply, is it at record levels or not?
ANSWER: Oh, I'm not getting ahead of myself. What we're going to do is not focus so much on the Government and the personalities but on our plan for the future. I think Australians are sick of an economy which isn't working for them. The fact of the matter is the cost of childcare has gone up under this government. The cost of seeing the doctor has gone up. The cost of energy bills have gone up. In fact, everything's gone up except people's wages and I think what Australians want is a plan for the future. That's why we're going to take real action on climate change and restore all the cuts to schools and hospitals. It's about putting people in the middle of decision making.


QUESTION: What consultations or procedures would be covered under this new Medicare item number? Is it all cancers or just certain cancers?
ANSWER: Well first of all, we don't accept that. This is the Government who's raised more taxes than anyone before us. And as our promises come out during the course of the election campaign, this government untruth will be exposed for what it is.


QUESTION: Are you worried about Malcolm Turnbull giving support to independents?
ANSWER: Well I don't hold the children responsible for the mistakes of their parents. You know I don't know all the circumstances but I can understand why a grandmother wants to see her grandchildren safe at home.


QUESTION: On the question of independents, are you prepared to seek assurances of supply and confidence if necessary after the election?
ANSWER: Well I think you've got to work on that. We've got to make the kids safe. It's difficult. We'll work with the security agencies but I don't hold the kids responsible for the mistakes of their parents and I think that's just the humane thing to do, isn't it?


QUESTION: What if you don't form a majority...
ANSWER: Thanks, Catherine. Are there any questions on this or other matters?


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Josh Wilson has said that Israeli checkpoints are places where people go to die. Julian Hill and Cathy O’Toole have made similar criticisms of checkpoints. Sue Lines has attacked the Israeli lobby in a speech, and Andrew Leigh once wrote that Australia needs to stop Israel going down a self-destructive path. Are you out of line with your MPs on increasing support for Israel? For Palestine, sorry.
ANSWER: Because the doctors want patients. The beauty of having the bulk-billing is that if you don't want to bulk-bill for the higher amount of money which you're getting, so we're giving the specialist or the service more than they're currently getting under Medicare, but if you don't want that patient, they'll have more choices. Because once we lift the rates at which we reimburse for the treatment or the particular procedures, what that means is that if you don't want to do that and you want to charge more, someone down the road is actually going to accept the new, more generous fee and see more patients. So it is competition, friends, and competition is going to, I think, provide a better service.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, this morning you talked about lifting wages for people down at Spotswood. What do you say to small businesses who are going to pay extra to their staff? Are you telling them that they'll have to absorb the costs of passing on higher wages to their workers?	ANSWER: We've said we'll work towards 50-50, so the
answer is yes. Our best estimates is that this has been a cut of $2.8 billion, and what I do appreciate about your question is, your question recognises the truth of what's happened. This government, this Federal Government, has decreased the proportion it contributes to the states. I'll get Catherine to supplement it, but in Victoria alone, our policy is funded because of our strong economic reform agenda, about reforming taxation, making multinationals pay their fair share. It means that in the next five years we can stop the cut of $635 million to Victorian hospitals which this government is proposing. But I’ve got Catherine here and she is very keen to talk about this.


QUESTION: Clive Palmer has agreed to pay back Queensland Nickel...
ANSWER: No but we’ve said we are going to radically reduce the out-of-pockets. I can't stop a patient who just wants to go exclusively for private treatment and doesn’t want to go through the bulk-billing system. And nor should I if that's what someone wants to do. But what I can say to hundreds of thousands of Australians is that Labor will be alongside you in the fight of your life. The unarguable facts, the black and white facts, the unarguable proposition is that we, because we are going to wind back unsustainable tax concessions at the top end, and we’re going to wind back some of the free ride that multinationals have been having, so that we can pay for the most significant injection of new funds for cancer treatment since Medicare was created.


QUESTION: Does that make him more of a threat in the Senate?
ANSWER: First of all, as you would know, this is a very fast-growing region. I don't know if you're aware, but Casey in the south-east, in this region, 362,000 people live here which is a massive growth on 10 years ago. It's projected these suburbs we are in now are going to grow to 560,000 people. There is no doubt in my mind that this Federal Government has walked away from promises it made to help the states fund 50 per cent of the health system, of the hospital system here.


QUESTION: Can I ask you about your fuel efficiency policy. Do you rule out exempting vehicles that sell less than 2,500 units from the policy?
ANSWER: No, it is not a simple question because of this, the population growth ...


QUESTION: On the fuel efficiency policy do you rule out that exemption for low-selling vehicles?
ANSWER: Sorry, you keep asking the question.


QUESTION: Vehicles that sell 2,500 or less.
ANSWER: This is a government who promised to spend a certain amount of money in order to get people's votes and then they broke their promise. This is a government who has cut $14 billion off what they promised in public schools. That's a fact. This is a government who promised to pay 50 per cent to the states for the administration and help in their hospitals and are paying 45 per cent. That is a cut. And unfortunately, we have a government who thinks that not keeping their promise, cutting services, is good enough. I tell you what, I’ve got a different plan. I’ve got a plan for all Australians, not just the corporates. The fact of the matter is that this government has pursued one economic plan for the last three years – a corporate tax cut for the big end of town. This government is fighting tooth and nail to retain unsustainable tax giveaways to the top end of town. They have not done enough to make multinationals pay their bills. So I'm not satisfied with the Government's history or record on these matters but indeed it’s not me who has to be satisfied, it is the Australian people. I'm the only leader in this election, out of me and the other fellow, who’s offering to put extra money into cancer. Is anyone here seriously saying that extra money into cancer is a bad idea? Is anyone seriously saying here that extra money into mental health to stop young people taking their lives is a bad idea? I didn't think so.


QUESTION: The Climate Change Authority which your policy is based on...
ANSWER: It’s cancers, howsoever they are. We're not picking different cancers. But I might get Catherine to talk a bit further about the range of propositions that we’re going to do to help people with their out-of-pockets.


QUESTION: Well, a lot are them are quite expensive cars, low-selling cars, are they going to be exempt under the policy?
ANSWER: No. No, I'm not. I think the issue though for the Government is that three years ago they said, "Vote for Malcolm Turnbull." All of them – Mr Morrison, Mr Dutton. They all queued up to have their photo taken with Mr Turnbull. They said, "If you vote Liberal and Malcolm Turnbull, that's what you'll have for three years." Ever since then they've had division and dysfunction and disunity. So I think that the one question, for instance the local member here in La Trobe, Jason Wood, he voted for Peter Dutton. He was happy to have Peter Dutton as Prime Minister but he's not happy to be photographed with Peter Dutton in his own electorate. The same goes for the Health Minister, the same goes for a range of Liberals in the south-east corridor. They gave Australia dysfunction and division, they’ve annoyed a lot of voters on the way through. I think the one question they have all got to explain is why isn't Malcolm Turnbull still Prime Minister of Australia?


QUESTION: Do you have concerns about the Government asking the Health Department to cost your policies?
ANSWER: We’re intending to form a majority Government. That's the case we'll put to the Australian people.


QUESTION: Malc … Scott Morrison has nominated...
ANSWER: Well, before you write off our chances, I won't.


QUESTION: ... April 29 or 30 for the Perth leadership debate. Will you accept either of those dates?	ANSWER: First of all, the MPs, Mr Wilson and Senator Lines have re-confirmed again this morning that they support Labor Party policy. For the sake of clarity, the Israeli Ambassador representing the Israeli Government said they could work with both sides of politics. Labor Party policy is very clear, and all of my candidates and members have signed up to it – a two state solution. Sorry, let me
answer your questions. Our policy is very clear, we support a two-state solution – that is the right of Israel to exist behind safe and secure borders, and the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for statehood.


QUESTION: On Peter Dutton, Labor have been running a hard campaign here in Victoria. Is he an electoral asset for you?
ANSWER: We’ve got a lot of good news for small business. First of all that you can vote for either side of politics with the comfort of knowing that we are both committed to businesses under $50 million, reducing their tax rate from 30 to 25 per cent. So that’s good news. That frees up money for small business. But we’ve also got another exciting proposition for small business, which has been very well received when we explain it to people. It’s this. We want to give an accelerated depreciation to businesses who invest in productive investment greater than $20,000. Or to put in plain English, if a company, say they run a food business, want to buy a new fridge, what we are going to do under a Labor Government, and this hasn't been matched by the conservatives, is add 20 per cent extra tax deductibility on the investment. So if they are making a marginal decision to invest $200,000, under a Labor Government they'll be able to deduct, on top of what they can already deduct, an extra $40K. So this is good for small business.


QUESTION: What did Melissa Parke say wrong?
ANSWER: Oh, well done, Clive.


QUESTION: She said her views were very well known for many years, why was she preselected in the first place?
ANSWER: Listen, we talked about small business before. Most Australian businesses know they have to pay their workers every week, fortnight, or month. This guy wants a medal for, after a couple of years, to pay back money which the taxpayers had to subsidise. Do you know what I find it amazing? He could find $20 million or $30 million for TV advertising and billboards but he couldn't find the money to pay his workers. Ninety-nine per cent of reputable employers in this country pay the workers first, then pay for their own head to be on a billboard, not the other way around.


QUESTION: Which views don't you agree with?
ANSWER: This is this government scare campaign. They can't work out who they are most days, this government. On one hand they say that electric vehicles are a bad idea. Now they’re saying that there’s a plan to exempt the rich. Can we just all tune out the Government noise on this and let's go to the fundamentals of our electric vehicle policy. By 2030, we have a target, that 50 per cent of new cars in Australia are electric-powered. Now this is not going to be as hard a target to reach as some say because from 2025, big companies like Toyota are only going to be making electric vehicles. Under this bunch of vandals called the Liberal Government of Australia, they got rid of our car industry. The fact of the matter is that Hyundai –Hyundai is a Korean company, is not greatly interested in Australian politics, but even Hyundai has had to come out and just set some facts on the record. No one’s ute is going to be confiscated. You can buy whatever car you want. But what this government actually wants you to do is to say to Australians: "We're going to give you old technology only. We don't want you buying cars which are going to be cheaper in the future and which are more fuel efficient." I mean, this is a government who wants to deny the car-buying public of Australia choice, competition and lower prices for cars.


QUESTION: Did the party ask her to stand down?
ANSWER: For low-selling vehicles? Which vehicle models are you talking about?


QUESTION: But this isn’t about her views, it’s about an unfounded claim about Israeli soldiers. Isn’t that a bit more serious?
ANSWER: For example? For example, which ones are they?


QUESTION: You have called her a fine foreign policy thinker and internationalist in a tribute to her. Do you stand by that assessment today and, if you do, shouldn't a Shorten Government at least factor in her views on the Palestinians?
ANSWER: I'm not familiar with those elite motor vehicles. Which sort of cars are you talking about?


QUESTION: [inaudible]
ANSWER: No, what is going to happen is that you’ve got to be fuel efficient and we are going to sit down with industry and work on it. But somehow if the Government is trying to say that Labor has a secret plot for there to be more Rolls-Royces in the garages, no, that’s just more sort of daily madness from the Government.


QUESTION: She made claims that she saw a pregnant woman forced to drink bleach at the Gaza crossing. Now either that didn't happen and she shouldn't have said it, or it did happen and you should agree with it and say it was the right thing to say.
ANSWER: Oh Lord. The Government, they've had six years and now all they can do is talk about us. Do you know my concern with the Government is that they haven’t worked out that out-of-pocket costs in cancer are a real issue. My concern with the Government is that they're not matching our proposal to have a mental health in-patient ward here. This government has had six years to come up with their great ideas in health. All they've done is cut. They haven't kept the promises they made early on. And as a result Australians have missed out.


QUESTION: I'll take you to a different matter, Alex Turnbull has said on Twitter that he's trying to roll climate change deniers within the Liberal Party. Do you think that party does have climate change deniers, and what do you make of Alex Turnbull?
ANSWER: Yeah, I know, it's confusing, don’t worry most Australians make that mistake.


QUESTION: What were you hoping to achieve in your meeting with Anthony Pratt.
ANSWER: Oh listen, I've got my diary, I spoke to the West Australian, we’ll give them two dates and I hope Mr Morrison can fit in with us. Mr Morrison – all of a sudden – he didn’t want to have Parliament now all of a sudden I’ve got to change my whole campaign to suit him. We will have debates. We will do the best we can to fit in with every state and every media outlet but there’s only 33 days or 34 days left.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Liberal Party has lost three candidates because of section 44 concerns. Can you guarantee there are no such concerns for any Labor candidates?
ANSWER: I don't think the current Prime Minister or Mr Dutton have satisfactorily explained to Victorian voters or Australian voters why Malcolm Turnbull is no longer the Prime Minister. But Catherine King was the Shadow Minister for Health when that fellow was the Health Minister, so I would be keen to hear her insights.


QUESTION: You said Newstart will rise under a Labor Government. Do you envision that being a small, modest or large increase and when would welfare recipients start to see that increase?
ANSWER: One more question, is there someone who hasn't had a go?


QUESTION: Franking credits and this electorate of Robertson. This electorate has plenty of retirees, many whom might be affected by your policy on franking credits. What is your message to them?
ANSWER: What's your first name, sorry?


QUESTION: When will the Newstart review start, finish and the increase go into people's bank balances.
ANSWER: Okay Rob, I appreciate you asking the question. I want to thank the media for letting somebody who is not a journalist to help us finish off the press conference. Rob, I’m going to take some time and have a chat to you after the conference because I want to understand what has happened. In terms of the contamination or the cancer would that be Fiskville?


QUESTION: ACOSS says $75 would be an appropriate increase to Newstart. What do you think of that figure?
ANSWER: What I would like to do is talk to you to understand the background. But in terms of how we pay for cancer in this country, I can't speak for Mr Andrews. I can pass on your disappointment to him, but I can't speak for him. But what I can speak for is – I haven't been Prime Minister in the last four years but if I am Prime Minister I do want to reduce your out of pocket costs. Now if you've had a very fortunate experience of everything's been free, that's great. But I can tell by the fact you’re shaking your head that that hasn’t happened. I want to do better. I apologise for what you've had to go through. I don't feel responsible for the current Government, but as anyone in public life I hate to see someone who has been a volunteer, you’ve got a six-year-old daughter, you're in the battle of your life – that's tough. What I can say to you is we are going to fund six million extra scans. What I can say to you and to everyone else is that we are going to fund three million extra visits to the specialists. What I can say to you is we are going to fund cancer research, put an extra $125 million into that. What I can say to you is that we are putting an extra $500 million into our hospitals. Rob, you don't have to believe anyone but I'm going to have a chat to you. I just want to understand because, to me, what you're talking about is the exact reason why I'm running for Prime Minister. You know, we can make all the chats about all of the other issues and the gossip and the Peter Dutton’s and the disputes, I get that sort of annoys people. If you're in the fight of your life, I am interested in your story, you matter to me, regardless of who wins or loses. So I appreciate you being here and I want to have a chat to you. Thanks, Rob, I think that's a pretty good note to end it on but we'll see each other on the trail. Thanks, everybody.


QUESTION: Peter Dutton is doubling down on his attacks on Ali France. What is your response to that?
ANSWER: Just before we get into questions I should acknowledge that arguably Australia’s best mare is going to be racing later today, Winx I obviously refer to. She is history on four legs. And whilst getting a big bet on her is hard, because she is such low odds, her value isn't in the bet, it’s in the fact that we have got a horse like this which has brought such excitement and passion to racing. I wish her and her connections all the very best for today’s big race.


QUESTION: Senator, do you think an apology would suffice? Should they go further?
ANSWER: First of all, let me say about Melissa Parke, she has done the right thing - she doesn't want to be a distraction in the campaign. She has very strong views. I don't share those views but she has very strong views. She has felt in the context of this election campaign that she would become a distraction and she has stepped down. Because Melissa, like all our candidates, cares more about having the Labor Party succeed, than a particular individual.


QUESTION: On the Easter weekend it appears that GetUp is going to be campaigning during the Easter long weekend. Do you think it is appropriate, given that GetUp is an independent organisation as you say, is it appropriate though?
ANSWER: Well first of all, we didn't have a candidate in Curtin until recently. To be fair, neither did the Liberals. She thought she might have another go at politics but she has decided it’s not for her, she’s done the right thing.


QUESTION: Can we go back to Melissa Parke for a second. I know you said it was her decision to step down so as not to be a distraction but is there not room within the Labor Party for differing views on a major issue like this?
ANSWER: She has very strong views. I’ve got different views. My view is that a two-state solution in the Middle East is the way to go. And I also have a view that Israel has the right to security behind its own borders and the Palestinian people have a legitimate interest in statehood.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, it's been reported that you had lunch with [Anthony] Pratt, yesterday, Australia's richest man. Can I ask, did you make any assurances that you'll be looking after the top end of town?
ANSWER: She made that decision.


QUESTION: Should the children of ISIS fighters be brought home to Australia?
ANSWER: No, what it is, it’s about a candidate who has decided she doesn't want to be a distraction.


QUESTION: Can I ask a question about Adani. Do you absolutely rule out revisiting the groundwater management plan in government?
ANSWER: There are plenty of views about the Middle East, longer than we have time to debate here at this press conference. In terms of Melissa Parke, she has served the United Nations working with refugees. I'm not about to start attacking her. But she has made a principled decision that she doesn't want her views on a particular topic to become a distraction to the election. I just say to Australians, this shows you how determined Labor is to be united and to present its best foot forward for the people of Australia. What we have here is a team who are determined to get on to the issues that matter most to Australians - that is, of course, turning back the cuts to hospitals and education by this current government. Making sure we can get wages moving again, because at the moment everything is going up but your wages. Seeking real action on climate change and encouraging greater investment in renewable energy, and if we do that of course that will lower energy prices.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten what do you make of Peter Dutton’s comments about Labor’s candidate in Dickson? Do you think he’s being deliberately provocative in suggesting that she’s using her disability as an excuse?
ANSWER: Yes, Labor will choose a new candidate.


QUESTION: Yes a question on cancer research spending. Mr Shorten you’re here with Brian Owler. In 2014 Brian Owler, speaking to health fund bosses, it’s reported said “seven per cent of procedures that were covered by health funds incurred out of pocket costs. So how many services incur this out of pocket cost? How bad is that problem of out of pocket costs? And do you expect Brian Owler to come into the Parliament for the Member of Bennelong given the swing that we saw at the by-election?
ANSWER: Well I wasn't there so I don’t know. What this is a story of is that we have is a candidate who is determined that her views might distract the election and she doesn't want to do that. I respect that. Over to you.


QUESTION: Just one question on that same speech...
ANSWER: The Liberal Party is full of climate change deniers. If they weren't, Malcolm Turnbull would still be the Prime Minister of Australia. The Liberal Party is full of climate change deniers because for six years they've been incapable of forming an energy policy. You would be aware there have been 13 different energy policies in Australia. No wonder energy prices have been going up. Because we have a Government who's paralysed. As for Mr Turnbull's personal actions, I mean, his party bailed out the Liberal Party, the Liberals didn't object to Turnbull money when it was going to them but, clearly, they have a problem with their support going to independents. I think the Liberals - do you know how they'd avoid this whole mess? Take real action on climate change.


QUESTION: Doctor Owler, just on that same speech, you're reported as saying, "we know that people will happily pay for cosmetic procedures but feel affronted if there's any cost associated with their cancer care." It appears that you took aim with people complaining about high medical gap care costs. Have you changed your mind on that sense?
ANSWER: It was a fundraising function which many people were at and what I was hoping to do was raise money.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can I ask you about Israel Folau?	ANSWER: Well I've
answered this question before. I'm very conscious and I can guarantee that my party is doing everything it can to eliminate any constitutional doubt over any of its candidates. We have had the advantage that a lot of our candidates have been in place. The Liberal Party has, to be honest, had to rush. In plenty of places they've only just got their candidates last week. So I guarantee Australians that my party and the processes of my administrative officials are do everything we can to make sure there is no controversy. You're next.


QUESTION: Thanks, Ali France and Peter Dutton - what's your response?
ANSWER: What I envisaged when I said that Newstart should rise is it's pretty low now. I don't know how many of you could live on 260-plus bucks a week. Most Australians couldn't. So I do think it should rise. In terms of how much, we have said we will review it. I wouldn't pre-empt a review. But what I say to people on welfare is a Labor government is not into poor shaming. We’re not into making you the cheap target to divide our community. What we want to see is a robust economy. Obviously the best solution to unemployment is a job. But I don't want to be dividing this country and attacking vulnerable people who could well be unemployed for a whole lot of reasons and making them the target of community resentment.


QUESTION: In regards to Israel Folau - and I appreciate many people will be repulsed by his comments, he has an implied right to practise a religion. He has an implied right to preach that religion. Why doesn't he have a right to put that on social media?
ANSWER: First of all, this electorate has many pensioners on a fixed income. Literally thousands were kicked off the pension or part-pension by this Government. So I say to the pensioners I haven't forgotten you. And I say to older Australians more generally, be they people getting a Government payment with no means test - which is what these franking credits are - or a Government payment with a means test, which is what our age pension is – I am determined to help reduce the cost of living pressures on you. So for instance we have been very successful in forcing the government in recent weeks, with the hot breath of an election on the neck of the government, to make sure that they unfreeze the Medicare payment. What I will do is make it less unaffordable to go and see the doctor. When you're old you need to see a doctor more. I am going to make sure that in our health system on the Central Coast, just as in every other part of Australia, that what we have is a system where it’s your Medicare card not your credit card. I also say to older Australians a vote for Labor will see downward pressure on electricity prices. It becomes almost like a Steven King film to go and get your electricity bill under this government. They have had no plan on climate and as a result there has been very little investment in new generation. So when it comes to cost of living, when it comes to standing up for the pensioners, when it comes to healthcare costs, we'll be right alongside you.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the government's released what it says is Treasury modelling, putting the cost of your tax measures and non-measures at $387 billion. What do you say the true figure is? And how do you explain the discrepancy, if there is one?
ANSWER: I haven't determined the end of the review but it will start after the election of a Labor Government.


QUESTION: What do you say the total impact is then? Is it 387 or is it different?
ANSWER: I think ACOSS is entitled to their point of view. If you are saying that is what ACOSS says then I am sure that is their opinion.


QUESTION: Clearly, the Labor Party is going to collect far more revenue than the government does over the next four years, over the next ten years. Clearly that's part of your plan. Doesn't that not have some sort of economic impact which will affect ordinary people?
ANSWER: I am shocked that, one, Mr Dutton hasn't had the good grace to apologise and, two, that Mr Morrison hasn't asked him to apologise. It just shows me how weak this Government is. Peter Dutton was within three votes of becoming the Liberal Prime Minister of Australia. I think Mr Morrison is acutely conscious of that. So to some extent I don’t understand why Mr Morrison hasn’t asked him to apologise other than I can only conclude that he is a hostage of Mr Dutton. But why don’t we get Kristina Keneally’s point of view. She has been campaigning with Ali France and she was also a Minister for Disabilities in the State Government. So I think she will bring some perspective to these offensive remarks.


QUESTION: On the accountant’s exemption, Mr. Shorten - the tax commissioner last month said he was sceptical that most of the savings claimed weren't from managing tax affairs but were in fact from other deductions, are you 100 per cent confident that you will raise the $1.8 billion over the next decade that Labor wants to from closing this loophole?	ANSWER: I think you
answered your own question. It is independent. I wrote to the current Prime Minister and said I thought we should respect days that are sacred  to the nation like Anzac Day and also Good Friday and we put in Easter Sunday. But it is a free country. I can't make everyone else do things. You did say they're independent and that's right. I just also want to go to a deeper point here in light of Kristina's quite impassioned statement there. I met parents back on the court. They are an all-abilities team. So their daughters have actually played for Australia overseas in netball. But they have an intellectual disability, some have been in the Special Olympics. In case there are some people out there who say, “Oh, well, politicians say mean things about other politicians with a disability, that's just part of the the political debate." I just want to say to every Australian parent who has got a child with a disability, we do not accept what has just happened. See, when you are the parent of a child who might be autistic or have an intellectual disability you are frequently judged by ignorant people in your own community. If your child might be acting out, people might say, "You're a bad parent." I’ve got friends who have a disabled child and someone in the crown slipped up to them and said, "Why did you have another child?" when they have two disabled children. Words hurt. Words hurt. We are having a royal commission into abuse of people with disability. Not all vicious words end in abuse, but all abuse of people with a disability started with vicious words.


QUESTION: But Mr Shorten -  But Mr Shorten I-
ANSWER: Our party is democratic and Ms Parke has made a decision to step down.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison has accepted a challenge to debate you in Perth, I understand. One, could you give us a direct answer to the challenge to have a debate in Perth, two, more broadly could you tell us how many debates do you think we should have in this campaign, and what kind of conditions would you apply to the way they are conducted, where they're conducted, and when we'd see them?
ANSWER: No, it was a fundraising function. All donations in the Labor Party over $1,000 are reported. Did you know the current Government only reports donations over $13,000. It is a fundraising function, part of the job - for better or for worse.


QUESTION: On treasury being used to cost Labor policies while the government is in government, and then those numbers subsequently being released during the caretaker period, is that something that Labor sees a problem with?
ANSWER: It's not the children's fault for what their parents did. I think we have to work out the best approach for the children's welfare. So, that's not a "no". I don't know all the circumstances, I don't know if they have family here to look after them but I don't blame the kids for their parents' stupidity.


QUESTION: Yeah, just quickly: Are you at all concerned about the Real Estate Institute's active campaign to lose Labor votes in marginal seats over negative gearing?
ANSWER: We'll adhere to the law. We’ll adhere to the science. I think, though, that what we saw in the last few days was decision making at its worst. The poor, old, beleaguered Environment Minister, who hasn’t appeared comfortable in the job anyway, she gets the letters from the LNP colleagues, the thug brigade of the LNP in Queensland saying unless you do this we will publicly call for your resignation. Then they miraculously leak the threatening letters. I think that is the worst possible way to do business. The sooner this Government is shown the door the better. And the sooner we have a national anticorruption commission, that can't be too soon in this country. Thanks everybody, see you at the town hall meeting.


QUESTION: But they say - its going to create more instability in housing.
ANSWER: Thank you. Are there questions? I’ll start on my left and work around but we’ll try and cover as many as we can.


QUESTION: It's one of your big ticket policies - can you tell us clearly what is the breakdown between new and existing properties and negative gearing? We haven't got a clear answer on that question.
ANSWER: I’ll certainly go to those remarks, but are there any questions on the cancer research announcement first? I mean, no but that’s cool if, I mean it’s pretty self-explanatory. If there aren’t?


QUESTION: Can I just ask about Julian Assange - should Australia be doing anything to stop his extradition to the United States, and what's your general reaction on his arrest?	ANSWER: Oh listen I think Brian is a very good candidate. How many seats in Australia have got a surgeon of his track record and his public policy leadership? Brian Owler's taking a significant financial hit, to run for Parliament, and that's his choice. But he's done a lot of good and we were just speaking to a lovely lady in there, Sharon, who's been working on the scanning machines for 45 years and she said to me that patients are going to be disappointed because he's done so much for them but Brian's willing to subject himself to this and all the other issues, Labor's very lucky at the moment we've got a very talented front bench, I promise you Catherine King will be an outstanding Minister for Health. We've got some very talented people running in hard seats, Brian Owler hasn't asked for the easy path through a safe Labor seat. Bennelong is a very difficult seat for Labor to win. But how lucky is my party that we're attracting people of his calibre, his knowledge. I think it speaks volumes for him, and perhaps even a little but for our united party, you know we're the party of unity but Brian can
answer some of the more detailed questions in a moment but I want to go to this question. I've noticed it percolate through conservative blogs sites or other forms, you know, or some of the government ministers saying there's no problem with out of pocket expenses in cancer. If you believe that go and ask someone who's getting cancer treatment right now. We've set up a website in the last few days, just to ask people's stories. We've had hundreds of heart breaking stories. If the government is so out of touch that they think that there's no out of pocket problem with the treatment of cancer, I suggest they talk to people diagnosed with cancer. I met an amazing lady at the Royal Brisbane Hospital, seems a lifetime ago but it was Monday, Elaine, she's had a diagnosis, she's been battling cancer since 2011. Nothing has worked, she's had to go into the private system, get the cancer trials. She's a really warm lady, I would put to you that 100 per cent of you here would hope that she was your neighbour, she’s a lovely lady. She said to me, "Bill I think we're now down to ten per cent chance, we're going to try one more drug". But she just held my hand and she just said "what worries me is not what happens to me, it’s that my family will be left with a debt." And, you know, go and ask the number of people that have to access their superannuation just to pay for their cancer treatment bills. So listen, I think the government shouldn't be running this argument that everything's fine and dandy, because it's not. Yes the public system's excellent. But there are waiting lists, massive waiting times. And I want to give you, even I as a lay person have worked out this about cancer - you can't out-wait cancer. Cancer makes you sick, but it shouldn't make you poor. There is a problem. Labor has deliberately made hard decisions, not totally popular with everyone, to say that you can't get a tax subsidy on your sixth property investment, but we are saying, "I would rather use taxpayer money to help Susie and Paul" - these are real people we're talking about. This isn't a theoretical debate or a Canberra game. Pancreatic cancer is a shocker. The Avner research, formed out of love, why shouldn't it have some government money? I don't know if you want to hear from Brian too on this question.


QUESTION: ACOSS said they want to ramp up Newstart, you say we need it lifted - I know you're going to review it once you ‘re into government, but can you guarantee it'll remain the same level?
ANSWER: We'll get Brian, and then I'll come...


QUESTION: So, on just what you said about Newstart then, are you suggesting that either way, whatever comes out of the review there will be some kind of increase of some sort?
ANSWER: You can in a moment. But I promised I would start here. Sorry. I'll come to you soon.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten is campaigning in Sydney this morning where he will reveal the latest details of the party's plans to cut cancer costs. He joins us from the Sydney Markets. Mr Shorten good morning to you.
ANSWER: Ali France, let's just get some background here, so we understand. I find Mr Dutton's comments disgusting. How you can launch a personal attack on a person who suffered an above-the-knee amputation trying to protect their child, and then say somehow they're exploiting that, you know, I just want to tell you what happened with Ali France. And she can say it better in her words. She was in a shopping centre. She's got her little four-year-old boy. An elderly driver lost control of their vehicle, smashed into them. She shielded her four-year-old, as any mother would do, and she took the full brunt of the collision. She suffered an amputation above her knee. And for people who are amputees above your knee, that is even more difficult in terms of recovery. For two and a half years, Ali France never walked. She was told she would never walk again. Now, she credits a fantastic surgeon. She credits fantastic technology. Two and a half years after she was told she would never walk again, she did. She's a very strong person. Of course, as you would know, though, you could imagine when you have, if you haven't been through it, or had a family member go through it, when you're an above-the-knee amputee, you can't just have a shower like anyone else, you can't just move around your kitchen. She's a strong woman, she walks a lot, she's out there every day. But what she had to do was modify her house, because it can be so draining sometimes, she uses a wheelchair in her house so she's got all her energy for outside the house. As anyone would know when you look at houses, very few of them have been built, designed for the use of older people, people with mobility problems, or, indeed, people with disabilities. She spent over $100,000 of her compensation money just getting the house she lives in. She doesn't own eight or nine houses, by the way. She just owns the house she lives in. She invested over $100,000 of her compensation money just to get that house right. She doesn't own eight or nine houses, by the way. She just owns the house she lives in. She invested over $100,000 to get that house right. She's a strong woman. And, by the way, she knows that Peter Dutton's making these comments because he's scared of her. What else could motivate it? She doesn't want people's sympathy. The idea, though, that any Australian with a disability would rather use their disability than not have the disability is a fiction. She never wanted the car crash. She never wanted the amputation. But she's a strong person. We want more diversity in our Parliament. So, why is it that the very - a mother who lost her leg protecting her child is now subject to a personal attack by a scared government minister? I think - I think that is disgusting. Now, I know the government boasts about, you know, going after Labor - don't they get it? This country is sick of that rubbish. I think Mr Morrison should make his colleague apologise. I also remind you that a week ago - it was a week ago today - the government announced the Disability Royal Commission. And their words were excellent words, beautiful rhetoric, soaring. They said, "We've got to have a culture of respect towards people with disability in this country." Well, that didn't last very long, did it? You know, so what we have here is Mr Dutton has insulted every Australian with a disability, and Mr Morrison has said, "That's OK." So, you know, Ali France is campaigning. She was at a railway station this morning. She understands - she can recognise fear in her competitor when we see this sort of base personal attack. But is this where the government's got to? That they're going to start saying a person is using their disability? Especially, all you had to do was get that 60-second back-story that I told you.


QUESTION: Firstly, to the news of the morning, what is your response to the arrest of Julian Assange overnight?
ANSWER: I think, when you single out parts of the population with an offensive attack, I think the rugby authorities have acted in an appropriate manner. I don't really want to get into everything that's been said, but there is no freedom to perpetuate hateful speech. And, you know, some of the comments which have been seen are far closer to hateful than I think appropriate for what people should be doing on social media.


QUESTION: What do you make of America confirming overnight that yes indeed it does want to extradite Julian Assange to the United States?
ANSWER: First of all, I think this is a desperate government who are willing to lie about anything. I just want to go to what Senator Cormann said in Estimates. This is why we struggle to take the government seriously on their campaign of lies and untruths. Senator Cormann was asked - there was a Treasury person asked a question by one of our Labor senators, and it was about costings. And Senator Cormann said - these are his words, they're not mine - we'd better tell that Western Australian Minister that.


QUESTION: Should the Australian Government, any Australian Government, Coalition or Labor seek to stop such move?	ANSWER: No, I'm not even buying into that debate, because it's a false debate. I'll use another example. This government I think from its propaganda is somehow saying that a tax cut in 2025 - which they haven't legislated - so, in other words, they're promising you something in 2025. We think there's a better way to do it, we don't agree with them. But it's not actually the law. They're now saying that, because we won't agree to something they haven't done in six years' time, that that is a tax increase on Australians. This is a fairytale. And I tell you - just hang on, Jono - to further
answer your question, the reason why I don't even accept the basis of what they're saying, it’s this. We all know the government wants to run a scare campaign. They've run out of anything positive to say about anything or anything, haven’t they. So, they just want to scare everyone. The reality is this election is about choices. I choose to shut down loopholes, like that accountants’ exemption. I choose to support not giving a property investor a subsidy for their sixth house, and instead I choose to spend it on health care. But I want to remind Australians, who are getting - on day two of an increasingly rancorous political debate, Liberal, Labor, National, who do you believe, what’s going on, I just want to say to Australians, this election is about you, the people.


QUESTION: You're campaigning in Western Sydney this morning, Bill Shorten, how worried are you about the prospects of the Labor Party not just in Western Sydney but in Sydney generally after the disastrous performance of state Labor in the recent NSW election?
ANSWER: It's clear that we want to spend more money on public schools. That will have an economic bonus. It is clear that we want to have universal kindergarten for all three and four-year-olds. Did you know Labor's policy is to provide 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year, to all three and four-year-olds? The dividend of that means that those kids, when they get that preschool, kindergarten education, are going to have a much better learning experience at school. The smartest countries in the world already do this.


QUESTION: The Prime Minister on the show half an hour ago released the Treasury costings pointing to $387 billion burden as the Coalition puts it of the Labor tax plan over the next decade. Can voters afford to elect the Labor Party?	ANSWER: I'm 100 per cent confident, that Labor is right, to stop allowing people deduct hundreds of thousands of dollars off their tax for what they pay their accountant. Just hang on Rich - your question, but my
answer. So I'm 100 per cent confident that what we can do, that this is a fairer system. Why should someone who pays a million dollars to their accountant, to minimize their tax for millions more - why should we pay for the double dip? I mean it's a sweet deal, it's not illegal, but enough's enough. How long does this go on before we say I'd rather fund the school where your kids go to, and I'd rather fund pancreatic cancer research?


QUESTION: It’s not the Government, it’s the Treasury figures. Are you saying the Treasury is lying? They are very similar to figures put out by Chris Bowen the Shadow Treasurer a few days ago.
ANSWER: Timmy - Richard, I've given you - we've got plenty of time, another 35 days for better or for worse - Tim and I'll come back.


QUESTION: To another tax concession Labor is promising to wind back to some degree, negative gearing. The NAB has put out a report this week saying it expects house prices in Sydney to drop by 20 per cent before this fall is over from the peak in 2017. Does it give you any pause for thought regarding the winding back of negative gearing concessions?
ANSWER: Well I'm going to be in Perth, and I'm more - I'm going to be at a town hall meeting talking to the people, and I'm more than happy if the other fellow comes along - ok, that's fine. Secondly, it's a shame that Mr Morrison, or the government I should say, just saw fit to have ten days of Parliament in eight months, cause isn't that where we do a lot of the debating? I'm certainly up to a couple of debates with him, certainly, but I want the people involved.


QUESTION: Just about out of time so confirming there will be no change at all if you win government to the negative gearing plan?
ANSWER: Well, the politicisation of Treasury is a problem. I mean the current head of Treasury spent ten years working for Peter Costello, worked very closely with the current Prime Minister. I worry that we see the trashing of conventions in our Westminster system and an independent public service, so I do see problems with that. But that's okay, I expect in this election, the government's attack on Labor to get louder, shout-ier, more aggressive, and more exaggerated, I guess that's the price we pay when we have a government who's got nothing positive to say about the people.


QUESTION: But no change to your future plan?
ANSWER: Well, the real estate agents, obviously, it's in their financial interests to keep taxpayer money flowing to their business model.


QUESTION: Just wanted to confirm that. The CFMEU is asking all Queenslanders to sign a pledge to support the coal industry. Should they sign that?
ANSWER: Yeah, no I'm telling you what's really going on. You've got to ask yourself, why are they campaigning? They're campaigning because they like to have people bidding for houses, who are getting a taxpayer - because the more people they have bidding for houses, the more they can charge their percentage on the sale. But this is what's really cute about what the real estate agents aren't telling people, or the institute, not each  - I don't hold each real estate agent responsible - this negative gearing relies on a principle that you invest in property, make a loss, and the government subsidizes you. I don't believe the Australian property market needs a taxpayer handout to make property worthwhile. In this suburb here, there's no new land. This argument that somehow, Moody's has forecast the property prices will rebound - this is a scare campaign by vested interests who love getting taxpayer money. But why should a nurse, or a truck driver, pay their taxes to Canberra to subsidise someone to buy their sixth property? You know, this Saturday, and I don't know if you'll have time when you're on the road, you go to a couple of auctions, and you will see couples, who've worked hard, they've got together their 20 per cent deposit, they're ready for the you know, fees and charges, and they'll just simply get out-bid. Under this government, property prices have fallen, but they take no responsibility for that. Under this government ho voted 26 times against a Banking Royal Commission, they let the banks run amok, now the regulators, you know, had a big reaction and are now all over the banks, the banks don't want to lend as much money - when does this government take responsibility for the shambles of the last six years?


QUESTION: Should the Labor MP's sign the pledge? Based on what you said?
ANSWER: We think currently the vast majority of negative gearing subsidies, go to people who invest in existing housing. We would like to see that oriented towards new housing. So the other thing I should just make, ican't say this enough, because I'm not sure that some of the vested interests who love their government taxpayer subsidy to prop up their business model will tell you, our changes are not retrospective. Any Australian who invests up to the 31st of December 2019, under the current laws, they'll be negatively geared. It's not a retrospective change, and you can still do it for new housing.


QUESTION: Is the CFMEU bullying your Labor colleagues in Queensland?
ANSWER: Well I don't know what's going on in the last seven years in the Ecuadorian Embassy, and I suspect, you know that'll come to light over coming days. He's an Australian, so therefore he's entitled to consular assistance, no more, no less, but he's certainly entitled to consular assistance, I noticed the government said the same thing.


QUESTION: I'm not talking about them, I am talking about the CFMEU. I am asking the question? Do you believe that union is bullying your QLD Labor colleagues?
ANSWER: We're not reviewing it - Newstart's too low. And we're not reviewing Newstart to keep it at such low levels, but we've got to get it right, you've got to see the interaction with the tax and transfer system. I mean, Newstart is just part of a broader problem. The problem in Australia is that everything's been going up except people's wages. We need to see that, and we're seeing a lot of people being left behind. This economy is not being managed in the interests of working and middle class people. Perhaps we can do one more question here, and then we'll move on, over to you.


QUESTION: We will have to leave it there, Bill Shorten thank you very much.
ANSWER: I think there has to be, but let’s see what happens with the review. I'd be amazed - we're not holding a review to lower it - we're not holding a review to forget about it like they did with the energy payment. But again, just to finish up, I would like to thank the Avner Institute for the work it's been doing. I want to thank, in particular though, Suzie and Paul. They just remind me of what's important. It was a good wake up call, when you get that diagnosis, you're going to worry less about your texts, and a little bit more about your family and what's important. I promise Australians, that during this election I'm going to do my very best to focus on you - that's why we are committed so heavily into revolutionising help with the cost of cancer. Thank you very much.


QUESTION: Hopefully many times over the course of the campaign.
ANSWER: Good morning Michael.


QUESTION: Well, you are promising to make life easier for Australians, but new treasury costings which the Government has released show you'll hit households with $387 billion in extra taxes over the next decade. Do you really think voters will welcome paying $5,400 a year more in taxes under Labor than the Coalition? It is a potent argument.
ANSWER: It will be a matter for the legal system to proceed, he should receive the support any other Australian citizens should receive, the matter is going before court so I don't think there is much more I can add.


QUESTION: Do you deny that these costings from Treasury are correct?
ANSWER: I have only read what you read. Mr Assange is entitled to his day in court. I'm not going to pre-empt that.


QUESTION: So no validity at all, you won't be taxing more -
ANSWER: I think he should receive consular assistance beyond that, I don't know all the facts of the matter and he should deserve the ability to be able to represent it in court which he will be.


QUESTION: A lot of retirees though, many of them who are on modest nest eggs are not millionaires, they’re worried about your changes to the franking credits. A lot of people who have got investment properties, a lot of them are not millionaires, are confused and concerned about your crack-down on negative gearing and capital gains tax. Will you be reviewing any of these policies, particularly the property ones in light of the fact we have seen the housing market really go downhill since you released that policy?
ANSWER: I think the state election had a range of state issues, there is always a lesson there and we're not complacent. What we are doing nationally is we're not relying on the fact we're the Government. They're divided, their third Prime Minister and 13th energy policy and a lot of the team are retiring and have given up. But we think it is a more important issue then just the Government. We want to outline a fair go plan for Australia, a positive vision for the nation. We want to re-win people's trust in the system and we are going to do that by focusing on families cost of living, the fact that everything in Australia is go up except your wages and we are going to really push hard on the fact that we want to have the world’s best health care Medicare system.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've arrived at a seat with a margin of 6.4 per cent, that suggests that you see yourself as a clear front runner, is that how you see it?
ANSWER: Listen, the Liberals are lying about taxes. Let's just call it as it is. I don't want to spend this election talking about them but let's go to it. What we call unsustainable subsidies for the top end of town and rorts for the multinationals they call tax increases if they want to fix it up. They have a different view. I want to use our taxes to invest the best schools in the world and invest in looking after our older Australians and invest in the best health care system in the world. I want to keep alive the dream, it is our Medicare card not our credit card that determines our health care in the country. That is our priority. This government is lying about taxes. What they do is they are just saying unsustainable subsidies and rorts and looking after the top end of town. They think that when you tackle that, that is increasing taxes.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will this family be affected by Labor's negative gearing policy?
ANSWER: No. Let's go to one. One issue they say is terrible, the Government and Treasury and let's face it, these days quite often Treasury just says what the Government wants them to say but let's go further. One of the rorts we want to shut down, did you know that if you want to deduct millions off your tax, you get your accountant to do it. Did you know you can also claim as a tax deduction the hundreds of thousands dollars you give to your accountant to deduct millions out of the tax system, you can even claim what you pay the Government as a tax deduction. Most Australians won't access the system.


QUESTION: It was reported today…
ANSWER: The fact that bank said this tells me a couple of things.  It tells me the biggest drop in housing prices has happened under the Coalition Government. I give points to the Coalition Government. They want to bag Labor for policies that are not even in when they are presiding over the drop-in prices right now. They were asleep at the wheel when the banks were carrying on like the rules didn't apply to them. Now they have got the regulators all over them, but the point is we have had a government that has presided over an unethical banking sector, remember they voted 26 times against the banking royal commission. When it comes to the housing market lets nail a couple of facts into the ground.


QUESTION: It was reported today that Queensland MPs were gagged from talking to the media about Adani, would you pledge to enable them to have a full and frank debate about the mine?
ANSWER: There will be no change to existing investors.


QUESTION: Exactly where in the Richmond seat will this radiation centre be?
ANSWER: No, that's right. Someone's got to have the courage to stand up for the next generation, that's what we will do.


QUESTION: While this will help access for a lot of people, there will still be some people left in the lurch and some of the biggest costs are the travel costs for regional patients, is Labor going to do anything about that?
ANSWER: Listen, people ask politicians, they seek this campaigning. Our view on coal is clear. Let me restate it for the record: Coal and our gas are important industries going forward. They are important to our exports and that will be part of our energy mix, but I am going to take real action on climate change. This country has been broken politically for a decade because we haven't been able to move forward and take real action on climate change. The biggest reason why households this morning are paying higher energy bills is because there is no energy policy. Thirteen energy policies from the government we need real action to hand on a better deal to our kids and to reduce power prices for our family and our businesses.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten in regards to the fish kill report do you think the Government's response will be enough to prevent a future fish kill?
ANSWER: It is up to them.


QUESTION: Yesterday your shadow Attorney General said Peter Dutton has some questions to answer over cash for access meetings with Mr Huang. Do you have any questions to answer about your own $55,000 paid meeting with the same Chinese donor in 2015. Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
ANSWER: If you want to talk about bullying, how about that LNP trying to threaten Melissa Price's job?


QUESTION: Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
ANSWER: No, I’ll tell you what my Labor colleagues they are adults, they can sign or not. Doesn't change our policy and our policy is as simple as this, we get that fossil fuel and coal is important to export and power generation but I promise Australian who are fed up with the dysfunction and disunity of the Government on climate change we need to act. We need to embrace the future, renewable energy will help lower energy prices and that is the direction we are heading in. No pressure from the Government or conservative media is going to deter us. We're not going to sell-out our kids because we're afraid of the right wing of the Liberal Party.


QUESTION: What about your meeting though, what was discussed there, what commitments were made?
ANSWER: Look forward to talking.


QUESTION: Is it hypocritical to be criticising Peter Dutton given your own links?
ANSWER: Hope so, see you.


QUESTION: Why aren't you marching in the Change the Rules rallies today?
ANSWER: Yeah well, there is a way to go, things close up. But what I'm going to do is focus on the people. I happened to catch the tail end of the other fellow's interview and it's all pretty negative, and I suppose if you've run out of ideas that's where you go. We have got a positive plan for the future of Australia. I think Australia is over the fact that we can't take action on climate change and that our energy prices have gone up. They want to hear what we are going to do to help get wages moving. They want to know we can properly fund our hospitals and our schools. And today, I've been at the market here at Flemington. This is a fantastic market. It is the centre of the cut-flower industry in Australia, Mother's Day is coming up, lots of growers and I've also been over to the growers shed with the fruit and veggies - a lot of small businesses here and I think they were interested to hear our ideas to help small business as opposed to big business.


QUESTION: If you were in Melbourne would you be marching alongside (inaudible)?
ANSWER: The Liberals are lying about tax. I don't want to talk too much about it. That's just a bucket of lies. Whenever Labor closes a tax loophole the Liberals call it a tax increase. Whenever we stop unsustainable subsidies –


QUESTION: You have set a target of 50 per cent of new car sales being electric by 2030. Have you set a target for how many of them to be built in Australia?	ANSWER: They are not correct. There you go, short
answer too.


QUESTION: You sort of touched on it before but does Labor then have plans to offer millions of dollars to these automotive giants to help resurrect the car industry.
ANSWER: Oh no. Listen, you and I know that, and more importantly Australians know, this is a Government who is going to run on fear and negativity. For me it's a choice. Do we want to spend tax subsidies giving property investors their tenth investment property or pay accountants a million dollars to minimise your tax and then let the very rich claim their payment they made to the accountant as well as minimising their tax, or do we want to spend the money on making sure that when you are in the fight of your life with the big C, cancer, that we help you with your out of pocket costs? It's a question of priorities. This government want to give away our taxes to the top end of town. We want to see taxes spent on education and hospitals. At the end of the day, Deb, we can over-complicate politics. It doesn't matter if you are in the market here, or on the farms where the produce is being grown or in the middle of our big cities, the mums and dads wondering what to do with their kids on school holidays, it's the same thing. It's about family and it’s about health. If your family is ok, and your health is ok then everything else is a possibility. So we are prioritising cost of living, health and education, lower energy bills and we are going to go forward on that, not tax cuts for the very well off.


QUESTION: Will there be a target for how many of those are built in Australia?	ANSWER: Let's go to the heart of the matter, I'll try and
answer it as quickly as the time will permit. But on property, let's not be confused. If you invest, if you negatively gear currently under the existing rules, for your investment that you've already made, it won't change. So actually no-one who is negatively gearing is affected. But going forward, we can't keep handing away billions of dollars to fortunate property investors, many of who are buying their fifth or tenth property when our schools and our hospitals are not properly funded, when we have got waiting lists for basic surgery, lifesaving surgery. So it's not retrospective the changes, and also going forward, you'll still be able to negatively gear for new housing. In terms of the rest of the propositions, I'll put it as simply as this: our tax system is making it harder for our young ones, our millennials, the younger people to be able to even buy their first home. We have got to start creating a level playing field. I want to keep alive the dream of owning your first home, not being able to property invest in your tenth home.


QUESTION: This airport business case, how will this work, and what will we see happen with that?
ANSWER: Cheerio, bye-bye.


QUESTION: Rocky's been an international airport for over twenty years, and Kirsten Livermore has been here, and so was Marjorie Henzell and they never did nothing it's been in their time it was an international airport, it's been an international airport for probably over twenty years.
ANSWER: Not at all, what this suggests is that I get what's going on in Australian families. We have made a conscious decision to start the 2019 campaign in the family lounge-room of an everyday Australian family; two kids, two marvellous handsome little boys going to the local public school, both parents are working. They're not complaining, they know this is a good country, they're paying off their mortgage. They're doing everything they can do to provide the best opportunity for their kids.


QUESTION: What are you doing for North Queensland?
ANSWER: No. And let's also be clear: anyone who currently invests in property and they make a loss and get tax subsidy paid for by everybody else, they're the current tax rules - the changes will not affect them. Our changes are prospective.


QUESTION: Bill are you confident in the Environment Minister's approval of Adani?
ANSWER: I might just, I want to share a couple more questions and then we will finish up for this one, we will have plenty of time to chat with us on the campaign.


QUESTION: On the radiation facility, would that be a public or private facility?
ANSWER: I think we need to be full and frank about the mine, that's why I don't think it’s any particular coincidence that the Government went to the Governor General today on the day they were going to the CSIRO was going to be examined about its report into the Adani mine.


QUESTION: In the past we've struggled to attract specialists to the Gladstone region, are you confident you can get specialists into those facilities?
ANSWER: Catherine has got one more exciting announcement for the North Coast today, our radiation centres.


QUESTION: And what are some of the measures as part of the $500 million commitment that will actually reduce waiting times?
ANSWER: Are there any questions on the lung cancer and radiation therapy announcements and then I'm happy to go to other issues?


QUESTION: So the Environment Minister has given the green light to Adani. Are you confident of her approval and do you think it stacks up environmentally and financially?	ANSWER: I'll let Catherine
answer that.


QUESTION: Will you be seeking to review this decision if you win government?
ANSWER: Any other questions about our fight against cancer and helping people with their out of pocket costs?


QUESTION: Michelle Landry this morning said that Labor's Just Transition program shows that the party is trying to destroy the mining community in Central Queensland. What's your response to that?
ANSWER: And I acknowledge that there are travel costs, the best way we're tackling that is we're bringing in the services to the people. Right now people have to travel vast distances, I've just been in Queensland, people have to frequently go to Brisbane to get timely attention, same in regional New South Wales, Victoria, all parts of Australia. So our 13 radiation treatment centres is I think a game changer in terms of being able to provide services. Yesterday we announce $500 million to help our public hospitals that will help reduce the waiting lists for cancer treatment. I don't know if you know but 83 per cent of our fellow Australians who get a positive result out of the government bowel screening tests have to wait beyond the recommended period to actually get treatment. So our public system is spectacular but we ask them to do a great deal with not enough, our staff are fantastic - they do a great job. So we're putting in $500 million, much of that will go to regional hospitals, to be able to provide it. We were in Rockhampton, sorry Gladstone, in Gladstone hospital yesterday – I was also in Rockhampton. What it means by providing assistance with some of this money is that 3000 people live in Gladstone won't have to travel to Rocky or Brisbane to get treatment. So I think one of the best ways we help defray travel costs is to invest in the regions. You know our Medicare cancer plan is actually a regional Australia health plan. Too often the results in regional Australia in terms of fighting cancer are unacceptable. And there's one reason. Because the services aren't close enough to home. Or they're too expensive or the waiting lists are too long. If there are no other questions I'm happy to go to other matters.


QUESTION: Mark Butler is quoted in today's Daily Telegraph as saying that the Just Transition Authority is strongly supported by coal miners. How did you find that out?
ANSWER: This government - too little too late. We've got a government in denial about the impact of climate change, we've got a government that is basically letting Australia's largest river system die because they have not allowed enough flow of water from the north to south. This is what happens when you get a crony government who just focuses on one part of the river system and not the rest. So, does anyone think if there was no election the government would have even done this? Labor commissioned the Australian Academy of Science, a peak body of scientists in Australia and they made it very clear that climate change and river flow are the reasons why we are getting unprecedented fish kills. Don't believe the people who say this is always what happens. It is not. This is part of the greater problem of climate change in this country. This government is simply a broken government because they can’t agree on taking action on climate change. We are handing on a more damaged planet to the next generation because this government can't make a decision on climate. I don't know how many of you here have had the chance to see an extraordinary intervention from a group of people who don't normally intrude in the political debate. No less than 23 former fire chiefs, leading experts. the firefighters the front line. the people who we count upon to keep us safe and to protect our property and farms. Twenty-three former fire chiefs today have issued an extraordinary intervention, they have said that the Morrison Government, the LNP Government are not doing enough on climate change. So this government, you know they ignore the scientists they ignore the parents they ignore the environmentalists they ignore the evidence. But how can the Morison Government keep ignoring firefighters? How can we be in a situation where we ask our firefighters to go on the front line to deal with the catastrophic effects of climate change yet not do the policies which will actually make their job easier, which can prevent future expansion of natural disasters? I am pleased to say that my emergency services Attorney General Mark Dreyfus is meeting with the firefighters, with the experts today in Melbourne. I will certainly be meeting with them in the near future. This government, this election, one of the issues that's going to be a referendum on is that we want real action on climate change. This government so far gives you no cause for any optimism that a vote for Liberals will be anything other than a vote for the same inaction, chaos and division on climate.


QUESTION: It's funny you mentioned the CFMEU. Stephen Smyth has asked if he'd like to know what the members that he represents in places like Moranbah or Middlemount will 'just transition' into. Are there any viable alternatives for coal miners in those communities?
ANSWER: I didn’t catch that last bit?


QUESTION: The vehicle emissions standard. When would that apply? Do you think voters should be told when they'd be put in place before the election?
ANSWER: First of all, we have said that we should not have foreign donations in our system. So the matters to which you refer have already been previously canvassed in the media. I understand the Government wanting to repeat old news to distract from their own problems but Labor took, we imposed a voluntary ban on ourselves not to take foreign donations long before the law caught up with it. We asked the Government, The Liberals and Nationals to do the same thing but they didn’t. They love that money. They did not want to stop it flowing. Now foreign donations have been banned two years later and I am pleased. In terms of the issue arising out of what happened yesterday and the reportage on Monday night, what we see as a business model of the Liberal Party where powerful Liberal lobbyists pocket tens of thousands of dollars for organising meetings with their mates in the government. This is a very bad look. But that almost, believe it or not, that is not the key issue, as bad as that is. What the real problem is that you have the former Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, he has been the chair of the National Security Committee. He is the leading spokesperson for three years on the national security of the nation. He has blown the whistle on these revelations. Not the ones which were already out there in the public domain, he has blown the whistle on revelations about this and he has said that Mr Morrison needs to explain this conduct and he has said that you can’t wipe it under the carpet, you can't brush it off as gossip. What we have is the former Liberal Prime Minister accusing the current Government of not dealing with an issue and doesn’t that just highlight again the complete division and dysfunction in the Government? Australians are sick of the infighting of the Liberals, especially when it comes to national security.


QUESTION: Did you plan on putting that standard in place?
ANSWER: We have had plenty of meetings with all sorts of people we always talk about foreign policy; you can talk about domestic policy. But one thing is for sure. Any donation that was given to Labor and I thought, to the Liberals, is always disclosed. You might not be aware but Labor has a self-imposed standard that if anyone wants to make a donation above $1000 it has to be disclosed. What we have seen here on Monday is a revelation that senior Liberal powerbrokers are pocketing money for themselves, not even their Party, they're pocketing money for themselves, providing cash for access. But I think, what has compounded the problems for the current Government is that the former Prime Minister, the man who the Liberal Party said we should all vote for in 2016, a man who they said we should vote for at the last election has now blown the whistle on the conduct of the current Prime Minister and his Senior Ministers. How much division under the current Government is this nation have to put up with before this current Government realises they can't just cover up these matters and what they have to do is focus on the national interest of the people rather than their own infighting?


QUESTION: Peter Dutton said Sam Dastyari has some questions to answer over the revelations on 4 corners last night. Do you think he holds responsibility as well? And do you think the federal integrity commission?
ANSWER: We have made very clear about donations. The issue here is that it's not me saying that Mr Morrison is wiping this under the carpet, it's Malcolm Turnbull.  What is going on with these Liberals? They are shaking hands and best mates last year. No-one can forget the footage of Barnaby Joyce and Malcolm Turnbull after the New England by-election. Mr Morrison putting his arm around Malcolm Turnbull in August of last year saying that Mr Morrison was ambitious for Mr Turnbull. But because all of a sudden they are so bitter with hate, anything Malcolm Turnbull says is apparently wrong according to Mr Morrison. This is not the way to run the national security of the nation. This is not the way to run the Government of the nation. A party that can't govern itself can't govern the nation. And it is not me saying this, Malcolm Turnbull is criticising this current crew but the people of Australia are fed up with a lot of them.


QUESTION: Bill, I'll just take you back to the Transition Authority. Matt Canavan spoke in Mackay this morning and he just wants a full explanation of what it really is.
ANSWER: Because I'm here.


QUESTION: Do you think it is fair that Fraser Anning has avoided criminal charges over the ‘Egg Boy’ incident?
ANSWER: I am not in Melbourne and the point about it is that is, two or three things. One is I am very, very, very proud of the fact that Labor is enunciating a plan to help Australians in the fight of their lives. We over complicate politics sometimes, it is all about the ‘gotcha’ and the division and the personalities. When you strip away the rubbish and the noise and all the coverage of politics, what really matters is your family and your health. I feel privileged to have spoken to Carolyn and Marliyn today. Both these women are very strong. They have had the shock of their lives cancer is not a journey, it is an ordeal, hell, it’s terrifying. I could not be more excited, frankly, about what we are outlining because I realise that what we are doing is going to make a real difference. Forget the noise. Even in this press conference here, even if you did a survey on the street here, one in every two Australians will get a diagnosis of cancer in their life and ask anyone in the street here do they know a family touched by cancer, yes, they do. And we know that the system, as good as it is, is not good enough. The reality is that if you go through the public system, there are waiting times. Great staff, great work but there are waiting times and there are out-of-pocket costs. And a lot of people have to move between the public and the private systems. I think it is a shock to a lot of people before they get that diagnosis of cancer. That not only does cancer make you sick but it can make you poor. The strategy for fighting cancer is to not out wait it on a waiting list to get a life-saving treatment or scan. That is why I am here today.


QUESTION: The man that Dutton is alleged to have met with, Chinese billionaire Huang Xiangmo, have you ever had any dealings or met with him previously?
ANSWER: I have noticed that this government, they are so addicted to scare campaigns they ever want to scare you about their own policies because there are a lot of similarities between our policy and that of the Government. I will hand over to a Senator who could host her own motoring show she is that expert on electric vehicles. But the point about it in all seriousness is this, we must have one of the few governments in the world who has not read about the future of electric vehicles. The reality is that all of the big car companies around the world are moving to producing electric vehicles. What we want to do is make sure that Australia is in that debate. We're giving Australians choice for cheaper vehicles powered by electricity. It is very clear and all experts have said that electric vehicles over time over time are going to decrease the cost of owning a car. But we need to send a signal to the world to start selling us cheaper versions of electric vehicles. We want to be a nation that manufactures here, never let us forget that under the current Liberal National Government we lost the car industry. We lost tens of thousands of jobs. Other first world countries are manufacturing cars but our short sighted luddites gave up manufacturing cars in Australia but under us it is going to be different. We have a three word slogan for Australia. It is called made in Australia. So we are going to fund this advanced manufacturing future fund and if electric vehicles are part of a manufacturing future we're going to provide them cheap finance. I would like to see us make electric cars in Australia because Australians are top-class manufacturers when you have a government who supports them. Speaking of electric vehicles let me hand over to the expert.


QUESTION: So you didn’t take any money for your meeting with him?
ANSWER: It seems a shame not end the press conference at that stage it was such a good point. Are there any last questions?


QUESTION: Well, the bookies are the best bet of how things are going to play out and your odds of winning are better than you'll get with Winx at the track tomorrow.
ANSWER: We can't put back together what the Liberals have destroyed. We can't bring Holden and Ford and Toyota back. We had a great car industry and it certainly didn't require the sort tax assistance which this government gives multinationals or big banks, but they blew it. They wrecked the car industry and I for one am not going to forgive them for that. But you can't put it back together again. But I don’t want Australia to be a country who misses out on the future. How did we get to a set of circumstances where you ‘ve got a Prime Minister in a government campaigning against electric vehicles? Let's just deal with the scare nonsense, no one is going to take your car off you okay, but why should we deny Australians in the next dozen years the opportunity for cheaper, more fuel efficient cars, world’s best technology. When did this become a country who decided to pull up the drawbridge and say the rest of the world is too hard, we are afraid of the future and we are just going to live in a black and white world, no colour TV, an AM world not FM world, no Wi-Fi, no smartphones. Australians are early adaptors, they love new technology, we will work with industry, we will work with the people. We should be a country in my opinion who makes things, we can make electric vehicles, we are certainly not going to say no, but we have no specific plans of the nature which the Government is trying to cook up at the minute.


QUESTION: Alright, Bill Shorten, we thank you for your time this morning. There's five weeks of this. We look forward to chatting to you during the course of the campaign. Thanks again.
ANSWER: We have to walk before we run, first of all we have to get rid of a government who thinks that electric vehicles are the devil. One final thing just to finish up - I just say to Mr Morrison, for goodness sake mate call the election. I am relaxed when you call it, we're ready , we've got the policies, I've got a united team, we've got a vision for the future. It’s no skin off my nose if you drag it on and on, the people of Australia deserve better from their Government, stop wasting the advertising, let's just call the election. You can call it tonight, you could drive to Yarralumla, you do it tomorrow, maybe you do it Sunday, maybe that makes you feel very on top of everything, but the reality is there will be an election, let's get on with it. The Australian people actually want to make a choice , six years of instability, six years three Prime Ministers, 13 energy policies, enough is enough, times up, let’s have an election.


QUESTION: Now, the man who wants the top job, Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, is also in the Emerald City. He joins us now from the Sydney Markets at Homebush. Bill Shorten, good morning to you. You kicked off your pitch to voters yesterday in enemy territory, in the safe Liberal seat of Deakin. You must be very confident that you've got this election in the can?
ANSWER: Well we'll do it in conjunction with the Airport and the Council, I  mean we've got to do a business case to make sure the numbers stack up, but I am very optimistic about airports in regional Queensland in many ways just like railways were to 19th century Queensland, expansion of airports is to 21st century Queensland. We shouldn't let the tyranny of distance stop Rockhampton from the growth it deserves. The reality is that you shouldn't, if you want to go north, have to fly south. I think we can break that tyranny of that by making sure we have Rockhampton as a more developed airport. Because once you've got a more developed airport, once the case is made and the facilities and amenities are here, we'll see more flights - and it won't just be international - what we'll see is more competition on the domestic airline routes, and anyone who flies in North Queensland knows that the big airlines often take the passengers as a captive market and charge them horrendous amounts of money to fly distances where in other parts of Australia you can fly to Bali for cheaper. We've got to back Australia, and that's why I want to see Rockhampton airport fulfil its position as a real economic engine of Rockhampton and Central Queensland.


QUESTION: But now to other news, a bit closer to home and Bill Shorten is promising to fund $200 million worth of free blood tests for cancer patients and older Australians on day six of the federal election campaign. The Opposition Leader has already pledged to invest $2.3 billion to fight cancer. Yesterday announced a quarter of a billion dollars to free up waiting times in public hospitals. But questions have been raised over Shorten's costing as he denies it's been massively underfunded.
ANSWER: Yeah but we've got to develop it. Everyone knows that it's been one of the missing links, doesn't it. And again, whilst you speak about Kirsten Livermore, the local member who has been here for the last few elections has been Michelle Landry. So at some point, when does the current member become accountable for the lack of action? I agree with the observation you make - that Rockhampton airport should have been developed a lot more than it has. I agree with you. But when do the current LNP members stop blaming Labor MP's - who haven't been members of parliament here for a long time - they've been getting good money for the last six years, they've been getting excellent money for the last number of years, when is it they actually do something for the wages they get paid?


QUESTION: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins us now from Melbourne. Good morning to you. Now you've promised to invest $2.3 billion to slash out-of-pocket costs for cancer patients. The Coalition says it's an irresponsible hoax that will actually cost billions more than you say it's going to. What do you say to that?
ANSWER: When it comes to North - Far North Queensland, and Cairns - we see that tourism is a big part of that future. So we've said that we want to do a number of things to develop Cairns and its role in tropical Queensland. One of which, we want to put $60 million into the Cairns hospital to make sure that it gets the support it deserves. The second thing we're doing is that we're also extending - we're going to take a billion dollars out of the Northern Australian Infrastructure Fund, and put it into a separate tourism fund. Tourism is a big part of Cairn's future, international students are a big part of Cairns' future. We also want to back in more infrastructure, so we've said that we want to build the road extending through Cairns going out to the Airport, because we think the congestion, especially in the Northern suburbs of Cairns is something to behold. If you look at how the Northern suburbs of Cairns have expanded in the last few years, it's like suburban Australia. And the traffic jams there are quite remarkable, and what we need to do is invest in the roads and infrastructure of the northern suburbs of Cairns, because it's one of the most liveable places in the world, not just Australia, but what we also need to do is make sure the road infrastructure is keeping up with what we do in Cairns.


QUESTION: Earlier today, we spoke to the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. What is your response to claims a Shorten Government would be the highest taxing government in Australian history?
ANSWER: Thanks Catherine, well said. Are there any questions for myself?


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will you match the increase to the offset to $1,000? I know you're on $920 at the moment but will you then extend that to $1,000?
ANSWER: Just before we get on to the other issues, are there any questions on our commitment on $500 million to reduce waiting times for cancer treatments or indeed our announcement on a new radiation treatment centre in Gladstone? If there aren't that's okay but I'd just like to deal with that first.


QUESTION: The government claims that your energy policy will effectively devastate Australian jobs. What modelling, if any, do you have which can be delivered to reassure the public that that is not the case?
ANSWER: Thanks, everybody. Sorry, did you ask your question about -


QUESTION: I've just got one back on the offsets, if I may. It sounds like the Coalition wants to get those tax offsets through Parliament this week before it breaks ahead of the election. Will Labor work with the Government to make that happen?
ANSWER: Well Adani has become a political football and it has become a political football within the Government. I don't think that's an exaggeration. I don't know what some of the LNP Senators like McGrath and the others were thinking, writing a letter which gets leaked to put more pressure on the Minister - where the Minister's got to make a decision on approvals, then all of a sudden a couple of the LNP heavies say 'unless you make the decision one way rather than the other way, we will publicly humiliate you and try and get you out of your job'. How can someone make a decision free of pressure when they're being bullied? I mean another explanation could be that she's satisfied by the science but the LNP heavy handedness, you know, Bjelke-Petersen-style thuggishness trying to pressure people now creates a cloud over a process which didn't need to be there but for the Government's division in their own ranks.


QUESTION: Just on the surplus, please. Do you not consider this a mark of good economic management that we are back in the black and will you offer bigger and better surpluses?
ANSWER: First of all, we've got to see what the Queensland Government does. And secondly, we will just adhere to the law. We're not interested in sovereign risk. Plenty of people have got plenty of opinions on the project. We'll just be guided by the law and by the science.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, tomorrow's the Budget - there'll be about $15 billion or thereabouts in fuel excise in there, with EVs, they obviously don't use fuel, are you happy to see the take from the fuel excise go down or will Labor consider some sort road usage charge in the future?
ANSWER: Michelle Landry, goodness me. We all know she's feeling a bit of the pressure but I want to commentate on her, I want to go to the heart of the matter. Labor's proposing setting up an authority which will actually plan for the workforce of the future in the mining industry.


QUESTION: (inaudible)
ANSWER: We spoke to CFMEU Mining and Energy Division. This is not secret. It's not a secret strategy. Go and talk to workers. I’ve been talking to workers my whole life. I've been there when they've lost their jobs. This argument that the government says we should never plan for workers to lose their jobs and some have to plan for workers to lose their jobs you want them to lose their jobs, nothing could be further from the truth.


QUESTION: Why not ban petrol vehicles then, the NRMAs are calling for that today, there are lots of European countries have done it, the NRMA wants it as soon as 2025. Why not just take that step and really drive the change?
ANSWER: Well let's face it. What we need to do is have an alternative plan, as well as those existing jobs. But in the Latrobe Valley I understand no one wanted to see those power stations closed, but I've been there. Sometimes companies close businesses. It can happen in a regional media office, can't it, a TV room, it can happen in privatisation by the LNP, and it can happen with mining companies.


QUESTION: The cost of that change Mr Shorten, now we have the final, I guess it's the final component of your climate policy. What is the total cost to the economy, what's the impact on GDP growth. What will the impact be on electricity prices. What will the impost be on business? Four parts.
ANSWER: Listen I see where the government's going on this, they want to scare you about new vehicle emission standards. Did you know that just about the rest of the world the OECD nations already has vehicle emission standards?  We would be looking at something comparable to US standards which is below Europe. We don't make cars here in Australia more so the cars that we import will all be built in many cases so these new standards. But we will work with the industry, we'll work with the manufacturers on how we introduce that standard.


QUESTION: Thanks Bill, well what's become increasingly clear here and around the world is that the old link between emissions growth and GDP growth has been broken by a whole range of technological innovations. The most authoritative modelling of the two emissions reduction targets, ours of 45 percent which was based on advice from the Climate Change Authority and Tony Abbott's of 26 was conducted for then Prime Minister Abbott himself and what that modelling showed from Warwick McKibbin, he said that under both targets over the course of the 2020s' real GDP growth will be around 23 percent. If anything energy costs under our target will be lower because there'll be much bigger drive into energy efficiency and there'll be a substantial positive impact on job creating investment under our policy as well.
ANSWER: We'll consult with industry about that.


QUESTION: The 250 big business polluters that you expecting to have to buy carbon credits, how many of those credits are you expecting that they will have to buy and how much would that cost?
ANSWER: Well I don't know if the gentleman you spoke about said that before or after former Prime Minister Turnbull has intervened in this matter. And I think Malcolm Turnbull has said it best here. I just want to quote I agree with his following comments he's just made in the last hour: Scott Morrison is the prime minister and you can't wave this off and say it's part of the gossip or the Canberra bubble. This is the national security of Australia. So, I think the revelations last night go to two issues, one I do agree with Mr Turnbull. This is a national security issue and Mr Morrison has to take responsibility for these revelations. Two, it just goes to show the ongoing division in the Liberal Party. The former guy criticising the current guy, the challenger, Mr Dutton, you know, he's in the target sights of Mr Turnbull. This is a Government who needs a rest on the Opposition benches to get their act together because they are so chaotic.


QUESTION: There's a new impact though -
ANSWER: Maybe Matt Canavan should have worried about what happened to car industry workers – he didn't cry any tears over those 40,000 jobs. I don’t know what he's done about making sure that QNI workers find jobs, I don’t know what he's done about the LaTrobe Valley workers who lost their jobs. What a Just Transition Authority is, it's an idea that's come from unions and some progressive companies who said, ‘Why don't we, if we know change is coming, put in place an authority to help plan the future workforce?’


QUESTION: But can’t you say before the election what the impact will be on steel makers and aluminium smelters in Australia? Why can't you say before the election what will happen to them?
ANSWER: Listen, I find the less time I talk about that fellow, the better for all concerned. I'm not going to give him any more oxygen. I just want to make one more point if there are no more questions. Mr Morrison should call the election. Just call it. This sort of politically tricky game, where somehow he thinks he is clever by not calling the election. I don't know, that is just an excuse to spend between $600,000 and $1 million a day on taxpayer's money - your money - on advertising to pump up their tyres. Just call the election. I also wish to inform you that I have written to Mr Morrison this morning. Whenever he calls the election in the next four days - if it’s Thursday of Wednesday or Sunday - the election period will fall across some fundamentally very important days. Anzac Day is a sacred day in Australia, Good Friday is a very important day of religion observation of people of many Christian faiths, so I am proposing that on the Good Friday and Anzac Day we have a truce - we don’t subject the people of Australia to our political ads, and overt campaigning. Of course MPs will want to attend events, sporting and symbolic events and Anzac and the Dawn service, of course people will want to observe religious matters and other matters on Good Friday. But why don’t we at least agree, I am going to say this to Scott Morrison via yourselves, as I have said to him in writing, why don’t we at least agree not to have paid campaigning, the big political machinery on Good Friday and Anzac Day. Why don’t we give people two days off from the election, I think that will do the nation the world of good.


QUESTION: By a lot more though -
ANSWER: Yeah, I think a lot of people have. But I don’t think anyone has ever had to pay $20,000 to have a meeting. And let’s go further I notice that LNP Senator McDonald, he's I think in a very racist undertone asked Senator Wong, Penny Wong - is she related to him? This fellow comes from mainland China. Penny’s family even though she has been here 43 years comes from Malaysia. I am sick and tired of right wing conservatives assuming that everyone who is Asian is related. Penny Wong shouldn’t have to fight this fight on her own. Can we just ask LNP and anyone else who wants to say something stupid about people from Asia; grow up, get over it, don’t share your silly thoughts of it and ideally don’t even think it to begin with. Shame on you.


QUESTION: You want to reduce emissions by 45 per cent or by -
ANSWER: Mate all of our disclosures are put out there and let’s be also very clear. When Senator Dastyari made a mistake of judgement, I met with him and he resigned. Let’s see how we go with the Government living up to that standard.


QUESTION: So what does it mean for a steel - what does it mean for the steel maker?
ANSWER: Good morning, everybody. I'd just add to Tanya's comments, the education cuts of the last six years are an election issue in the next six weeks. We understand that tonight's budget is much more a political leaflet than it is an economic plan for the future. But one thing which the Government could do is reverse their $14 billion cuts to public education. Because after all, what could be more important than giving our kids the best possible education?


QUESTION: That's a guarantee? We will still have existing steel and aluminium makers in Australia?
ANSWER: Thank you for reminding everyone that last year, the Government said they could only find $500 for a working person on perhaps $90,000 a year. But because of our economic reforms, we said we would increase the refund available to working Australians to $928. The Government's now realised that they have a problem, that Labor has bigger, better, fairer tax cuts for nearly 10 million working people.


QUESTION: Can I ask, with the electric vehicles, logic tells you that would put pressure on baseload power in this country (inaudible). Do you have any discernible idea of what that may be and whether or not you will need a fair more amount of coal in the future?
ANSWER: First of all, don't we all owe it to lift the level of journalism in this country and not simply repeat unsubstantiated Government attacks?  What we've done - and I'll give you three or four proof points to help reassure you because I actually think Australian people want action on climate change. I think there are over a Prime Minister bringing in a piece of coal like a pet rock and brandishing it as some sort of lucky charm in Parliament.


QUESTION: (Inaudible) carbon credits for Kazakhstan. What controls, quality control do you have over those international (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Well, we'll have to see what the proposals are. We don't give them a blank cheque. If it's as it has been outlined, you know, we'll have to see. I mean, the Government don't always drop everything, do they? I imagine there should be something new in the Budget, so we'll have to wait and see. But in terms of working with the Government, we've always been pragmatic about good ideas but it does highlight this sudden rush.


QUESTION: On the vehicle emission standards, you're going to put the onus on car dealers rather than the manufacturers to meet them. How will that sort of work in practicality? Will it be a case of dealers having to keep paperwork and if I'm going to go and buy a Land Cruiser, will the dealer tell me no, I've got to sell you a Prius because of government regulation? And secondly, Mr Shorten on tax - on the budget. If the Government wants to get its tax cuts through Parliament this week, will you support that?
ANSWER: Well first of all, let's see the final numbers and I want to thank the coal and the iron ore industry. Because it's that quantity of coal and iron ore going to North Asia which has done the heavy lifting. But of course, you've got to be careful of relying on commodities to sustain. I mean, there's a couple of reasons why we will have a good economic surplus if that is the case. One is the level of income taxes that people are paying has gone up. So if we have a surplus, I'm not going to thank the Government, I thank the Australian people and we thank our export resources industry. But let's see and you know we'll be constructive.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the reason we don't have a vehicle standard in Australia at the moment is in part because powerful interest groups have prevented one from being implemented for the best part of 15 years. Your policy is not clear about when the new vehicle emission standard is set to take effect. Also you are in terms of industrial pollution you're saying you've got a 45 per cent emissions reduction target but you're going to consult with businesses about their baselines and trajectories. Agriculture is out of these curves all together, can Labor guarantee that you'll be able to deliver a 45 per cent economy wide drop in emissions by 2030 given that your own policy is heavily caveated at this point. And also, ahead of the election, would you as the Government has done, release a carbon budget so that Australians are aware what level of abatement you are factoring in in each sector of the economy. The Government has done it, will Labor do it?
ANSWER: Thanks. That was Alicia Payne, one of Labor's great new candidates running here in the ACT for the federal election.


QUESTION: Will you produce meaningful numbers then?
ANSWER: Thanks Mark. As I said, Mark and my team are happy to take questions - I might start over here and I'll just come around.


QUESTION: Actually that was covered off on that question but actually on the land sector, so there's no target for agriculture? You don't know anything about the compliance for companies under the safeguard mechanism so how are you going to drive the purchase of abatement from the carbon and land sector?
ANSWER: Listen, we're not touching the fuel excise but we do need to talk about an electric vehicle future don't we. For me, when I look at electric vehicles maybe 10 years ago I would have thought, oh that seems all a bit fantastic but I'm certainly a convert to that being a part of our automotive and climate future. It's estimated by the experts that by 2030 there will be three million electric vehicles on Australian roads.


QUESTION: Is it fair that farmers have to pay for the rehabilitation of that land in those clearing laws you mentioned?
ANSWER: Well, I'm going to get Anthony to supplement him but before we start some government campaign about you know for every new idea is a bad idea. I think instead what we need to do is, do we want to be a country stuck in the past or a country joining the rest of the world in the future. I know Australians agree with me. They actually want us to move forward in considered ways but Anthony.


QUESTION: But the question is whether it's fair that the farmers have to be responsible for that or whether the Government should subsidise them to clear their land.
ANSWER: Well, we think that this is an overdue first step. I am not going to start saying I am going to ban vehicles. What we are going to though is introduce proper emission standards in consultation with industry. Did you know we're the only country in the OECD that doesn't have a proper emission standards and all we're proposing is to look at the adopting the American standards which aren't even as onerous as the EU.


QUESTION: Has Labor done any modelling on the impact of this policy on the price of vehicles and particularly the price of Australia's two most popular vehicles the Ford Ranger and the Toyota HiLux? And has there been any modelling also on the availability of vehicles? Will people be able to buy the vehicles they want at the price they're currently paying?
ANSWER: Four parts, I'll try and remember your four part question. I might get Mark to supplement.


QUESTION: Under your plan will Australia be able to recycle all of it's recyclable material and not send it offshore?
ANSWER: Yes, David. I can't guarantee what companies make their you know, other decisions unrelated to this. But I've spent longer than I think most people in Canberra, working with the steel industry. I've seen the job losses which have happened when you've got poor investment decisions and you got a lack of government support. But I also know that what the steel industry wants - and there's two large steel makers in Australia - what they want is policy certainty. I know the companies that you are asking about rhetorically. They are sick and tired of the Coalition chaos. They are sick and tired of having three Liberal Prime Ministers, 13 different energy policies. They know that they've got to compete globally. The extension of the safeguards mechanism isn't a big issue for them because they're already covered by Malcolm Turnbull's, I should add. And what we've done, unlike the current Government, is we're providing a $300 million fund to help work with them.


QUESTION: So you think you can deal with all of our recycling waste in Australia by doing what you’re doing?	ANSWER: Okay, I'll let Mark
answer that.


QUESTION: The European Union's just voted to ban all single use plastics by 2021, so going further than what you're announcing things like earbuds, straws, that type of product. Why not follow the European Union, if they can do it why can't we?	ANSWER: Listen, if you want to buy a Land Cruiser, you still should. That's up to you. But I'll get Anthony to
answer the rest of the issue and then I'll come back on tax cuts.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, when will voters get details on your climate change policy?
ANSWER: Sorry, you're next - Katharine and then you.


QUESTION: What about Kyoto carry over credits (inaudible) can you say much on that?	ANSWER: Alright, Mark is very keen to
answer your question, Katharine so I will defer.


QUESTION: The government is today announcing one off payments for concession card holders to help with rising power prices (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Hang on, I did promise you next.


QUESTION: Federal Labor said that if elected it wishes to put a woman into the role of Governor General. How that has any, or what impact on Mr Hurley?
ANSWER: Alright, we're very bullish about carbon farming initiatives, we do thing Ag has a role to play but we're going to do it with them, we're not going to do it against them but I'll get Mark to speak further.


QUESTION: What impact will that have on Mr Hurley?
ANSWER: Hang on, we've been going a fair while here, I've kept a count of the questions, there has been 20, admittedly four of them from Mark and five from Speersy. I want to hear from a couple of people who haven't spoken. I know, this is the way we want to do it.


QUESTION: Even if she's not as good?
ANSWER: Well first of all, until you get a government who is committed to introducing electric vehicles into Australia, some of the cheaper models which are manufactured overseas won't be available here. We're going to change that, it's called the laws of supply and demand. And what we're going to do is create a market, a market for vehicles which are more fuel efficient, which are more friendly to the environment and it'll take time, it'll take time. But remember back in 2007, only about 7,000 households had solar rooftop. No doubt, that if you'd been there someone might have asked the question well you know will that be too expensive or can it be done. 2 million households are there now. The question I've got is and someone asked earlier about is it fair, is it fair that because the Coalition is so dysfunctional on climate change we hand on a dud deal to our kids? How far is it, that we push off all the tough issues, push off all the reforms to other generations to clean up our mess? Labor doesn't take that. This climate change policy is a point of real difference. Labor is not retreating from the inevitable onslaught of the knuckle draggers of the right wing of the Coalition. I'm not like Malcolm Turnbull, they can't give me orders. My orders I take are from the Australian people. You know, if the Government were worried about climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister. We are pleased that climate is an election issue. We are pleased that we are actually backing in some of our international commitments. We are pleased with a policy which will protect existing industries but support the creation of new industries. We are pleased that we can reduce the cost of living through energy bills by investing in renewables. We are pleased with the take up in the future of electric vehicles. Tomorrow won't see a vast change in the type of cars on the roads. But if we assemble here in a decade's time if we are successful at the next election, our car fleet will look different and it will be more accessible and there will be more jobs. So, very good to see you all, we'll see you again tomorrow and the next day and the next day. But climate change for Labor is a matter of first order importance, we put forward our policies, we look forward to debating the Government because the voters of Australia want real action on climate change from their major political parties and we're offering that today.


QUESTION: To take you back to this the container deposit scheme when would you envisage that being introduced and would you be modelling it on say, South Australia's how would that work?	ANSWER: Thanks Andrew, I want to thank our hosts here to show us what Australia can do when we set our minds to becoming a recycling power. For me, today's announcement is all about
answering the question what sort of country do we want to leave to our kids and our grandkids?


QUESTION: Would you expect those states to have the national container deposit scheme? We're working on the basis that it's opt-in and on an opt-in basis we want to make sure that we get over that initial challenge, that we have, which as I say is where if you're trying to set up a business to do the actual recycling not just to do the collection then everything at the moment is prepared to a different grade.
ANSWER: Thanks very much, I should have just thanked our hosts Repurpose It, this is a remarkable business success story. A few fairly bold individuals decided to back their savings on a new way of doing business, recycling contaminated soils and building waste and what we see now here is 40 direct jobs, 30 contractors, 150 indirect jobs from one business and I think that if we understand that recycling and our war on single use plastics - it's good for the environment, it's good for the world, it's good for our kids and our grandkids and it's good for jobs. That's how Labor sees it,  leadership looking after people, looking after our environment and doing what as parents we are all fundamentally DNA hardwired to do, which is hand on a better deal to the ones who come after us than what we received. Any questions on this?


QUESTION: So how do you convince states like Victoria who have so far resisted a container deposit scheme. What do you have to do to get them over the line?
ANSWER: I will get Tony to supplement this, the reality is that other countries, we can't rely on other countries to take our waste in the future like we have in the past, so we have to do more. But we are part of the globe, everything is interrelated. What we're very committed to doing though is working with Pacific nations to help clean up the oceans but I'll get Tony to supplement a bit further.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Chris Bowen said that if elected a major economic statement would come out in the third quarter. What do you have to say to this?
ANSWER: One thing which we haven't directly addressed is that we intend to set targets for the Commonwealth in our use of recyclable products. We believe that we can use the power of government to help set the best example and even on a project like this, the reality is that it's the Commonwealth that helps roll out road projects, we should be requiring that they use more recycled materials in the construction of new roads.


QUESTION: It's not far away is Labor really ready for it though?
ANSWER: Well we've got some COAG targets, we want to see that 70 percent of Australia's plastic packaging will be recycled or composted by 2025. We want to see that 30 percent of our recycled content will be included across all packaging by 2025. I'm not going to give a deadline when we can do exactly what you say but unless you set ambitious stretch targets you're never going to get there.


QUESTION: What are your thoughts on Eddie McGuire's comments yesterday about Cynthia Banham?
ANSWER: I'll get Tony to supplement but you know as a general principle we are open to what the EU is trying to do but we're also conscious of unintended consequences. Quadriplegics might need plastic straws to consume liquids, so we're just conscious that we've got the goal of wanting to remove single use plastic but we've also got to be careful that there are particular groups, or particular examples that we haven't thought of and that there's an unintended consequence but Tony is right across this, I'll get him to supplement.


QUESTION: Can I ask another recycling question, sorry you've broken a record here. Obviously the industry particularly in Melbourne hasn't had a great run in the last few years with some fairly devastating fires. How do you ensure that the industry, if it's to grow, grows in a way that isn't going to put the community at risk?
ANSWER: Very soon, very soon indeed but let me just remind voters of what we've already said. What we have already said is that our goal is that 50 percent of our energy mix by 2030 should come from renewables. What we've already said is that we're committed to the Paris targets, the international convention to reduce our carbon pollution emissions by 45 percent of 2005. We're committed to by 2050 we'll have zero net emissions. We've also said in what I think is exciting for consumers and households that we want to see the roll out of more batteries in people's households.


QUESTION: On a final separate note if I can. There are advocates on the steps of Parliament today to advocate for victims of sexual abuse who want change to the National Redress Scheme. How is Labor moving towards that, would it support such an indication?
ANSWER: Well we've certainly been considering that question and this is a particular accounting technique which only the Australian Liberal Party and the Ukraine use, a lot of other nations have turned their back on it. We'll give a decision on that very soon. But certainly as I'm aware it's only the Australian Liberal Party and the Ukraine proposing to use these carry over credits that I am aware of.


QUESTION: What would be the first thing on our agenda if you were elected on this matter?
ANSWER: Listen, it's about $1.45 a week, a one off payment for 12 months you get this cheque in the mail. This government though seems to think that energy prices only go up in election years. So, do I think $1.45 a week for 12 months, it's better than nothing but it' not an energy policy, $1.45 a week for 12 months is not an energy policy it's an election con.


QUESTION: Truck drivers are protesting across the country today, what would Labor do to help reduce the truck (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Sorry I missed the very last part of that?


QUESTION: You began your day with a visit to the Al Noor Mosque, one of the two mosques targeted in the attack, you left a floral tribute as you know, thousands of people have done throughout the past fortnight. What did it mean to visit that site this morning where dozens of innocent worshippers were killed?
ANSWER: Oh well, no. The government's nominated the New South Wales Governor to be Governor-General we accept that's happened but I think that the next Governor-General after that should be a woman.


QUESTION: Just finally the New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has earned widespread praise from across the globe for the way she responded, her leadership, the way she comforted the family members of the victims in the day after the attack. You were there at the service, you saw the way that New Zealanders responded to Jacinda Ardern's presence, the standing ovation. How have you found the way that the Kiwi Prime Minister has handled the aftermath of this tragedy?
ANSWER: Oh, I don't buy that Scott Morrison argument that the only way women should get ahead is if it's not at the expense of a man. I put it a different way for the last hundred and twenty years why have so many good women missed out and men been appointed instead?


QUESTION: You talked a lot about Australian tradies - there's a lot of international tradies here getting a qualification but they say they can't work, as they can't get apprenticeships afterwards. Are we doing enough for these people who come into our country to learn a trade and fill a gap in the skill shortage?	ANSWER: I'll get Tony to
answer that question.


QUESTION: Can you guarantee that no one in Labor has ever offered to influence Australia's laws while speaking to a lobbyist about political donations?
ANSWER: Chris is right. The reality is that this budget which is being brought down on Tuesday it's a political document. Normally budgets are brought down in May, the government is going to bring down a budget early in the hope that they can get you to forget about the last six years and in the next six weeks promise you stuff they haven't done in the last six years.


QUESTION: Just on that, Labor has announced that they'll be preferencing One Nation last on how to vote cards, will you also be telling One Nation not to preference you above the Coalition in Queensland?
ANSWER: We're ready. We're ready because we're stable. We're ready because we're united. We're ready because we have a more talented team. We're ready because we've done the policy work. We're ready because we understand that everything in Australia is going up except workers’ wages. We're ready because we need to undo these cuts to hospitals and schools and TAFE's and childcare and universities. We're ready because this nation can't afford another three years of inaction on climate change.


QUESTION: What do you say to Pauline Hanson's conspiracy theory that Port Arthur was a conspiracy to deprive Australians of their guns?
ANSWER: Yeah, listen I know Cynthia and Michael I thought those comments were devastating. As I understand he had no idea about the identity of the person throwing the coin and so he has made clear that he apologies and if he had any idea about the circumstances he wouldn't have said it. But nonetheless, the words have been said I am sure that like all of us, he wishes he hadn't said what he said.


QUESTION: If One Nation are that bad why should a government accept their vote in the Senate? A Coalition or a Labor Government for that matter?
ANSWER: I'll get Kim to supplement but you've got to have good environmental health and safety, you've got to have good occupational health and safety. I think there have been lessons learned. Having said that we can't ever compromise safety. What I like about this plant, for example, is that if you look at where it is geographically it's got a big buffer zone, so even though the suburbs of Melbourne are expanding this is a big footprint.


QUESTION: But is there a moral question there? If they're not good enough to be worthy of any support in an election setting but morally can a government accept their vote once parliament is sitting?
ANSWER: Yes I would. First of all to those survivors and their supporters I accept what you are saying. That the Royal Commission made recommendations on redress and this current government didn't go far enough. Now, we were left with a complex choice, do we vote against what was put forward and wait for something better. Or do we get on with some form of redress? So Labor nailed some of our concerns that we would like to improve if we form a government but we still wanted to see some of the compensation some of the redress start now and I think on balance people agreed with that.


QUESTION: There have been times when the ACTU and I think sometimes possibly activist groups have said put the LNP last. They certainly did that in Queensland in Longman. It's a very simple message obviously but it doesn't mean putting One Nation last. Would you be disappointed if the unions used that language now? Put the LNP last?
ANSWER: Well we will talk to the advocates, we want to get on with how we could create a consensus to improve redress.


QUESTION: George Christensen spent a lot of time outside the country, more time in the Philippines I think than he spent in parliament he concerned about his overseas trips?
ANSWER: Well, one of the issues about reducing the truck road toll, is better roads. The other issue is of course fatigue, I fundamentally believe that if you pay truck drivers smaller rather than better rates for driving their trucks it creates unsafe circumstances.


QUESTION: Will Labor be seeking to strengthen Australia's gun laws?
ANSWER: I spoke to Australian Muslims who are over here, who lost family - that's what's touched me. The murder of 50 people, it's got repercussions, there are Australians who have lost loved ones, and perhaps I hadn't stopped to think about that before I actually met people from Melbourne, and elsewhere who had family who were murdered here.


QUESTION: What do you make of reports this week that Scott Morrison in 2014 proposed getting $9 billion for internment camps for people overstaying their visas and that sort of thing. Is that something that you think the Prime Minister of Australia should be promoting?
ANSWER: The mosque is set opposite a park, it's in a quiet area. People should be able to live in quiet neighbourhoods and worship their god without a deranged terrorist killing them. What struck me is that it's a very peaceful area. When we think of this sort of violence, we think perhaps of battle scenes in the Middle East, we don't think it's possible - and New Zealand is very similar to Australia. So to see that sort of violence and hate in a suburban, quiet, tree lined street - it's horrible. You just, what must those people be thinking when they were just at Friday lunchtime at church.


QUESTION: You've got the Budget next week do you expect to see income tax cuts in that Budget and what would a fair budget look like for you?
ANSWER: I've known Jacinda for a number of years, I think she's doing an outstanding job. For those of us in public life, and when you watch someone put in such a significant global performance like Jacinda, you sort of say, you hope that we in Australia could step up in the way that she has stepped up. New Zealand are rightly proud of Jacinda Ardern's response, and I think she is the right person for the times here in New Zealand, and I think there's a lot of goodwill towards her. It's a reminder to us in Australia, that when we let the better angels of our natures and political debate, when we try and bring people together, it leaves everyone feeling better about ourselves as Australians.


QUESTION: Should Morrison -
ANSWER: Thanks. That was Fiona McLeod Labor's candidate for Higgins and I'm accompanied also by Jennifer Yang, Labor's candidate for Chisholm.


QUESTION: Would Labor support another round of income tax cuts, so do you think that there's any justification for them?
ANSWER: Well, international students are a very important part of Australia's economic future. We should be training people all around the world. But what we've also got to do is train locals as well. So our policies have no impact on the international students who are coming here. But what I need to do is remedy the crisis in trades training which the Abbott/Turnbull/Morrison governments have created in Australian apprenticeships. But let's call it as it really is - talk to anyone who works in the TAFE system, the TAFE teachers, the people who work in TAFE. They have been battered from pillar to post - funding cuts, privatisation - really we owe a debt of gratitude, not just to the people doing their apprenticeships but to the people who are teaching them. That's why, we've said that we're going to reverse the privatisation of public TAFE in Australia. We're going to reverse the privatisation of vocational education in Australia. We're going to say that at least two in every three dollars that the Commonwealth spends on vocational education, needs to be spent in public TAFE. So that's our plan. International students still absolutely welcome. My priority of course will be to make sure that we're giving our own people the best opportunity to pursue a trades future.


QUESTION: Labor wants to boost super contributions to 12 percent. Is it a good idea considering that wage growth has stagnated?
ANSWER: Not that I'm aware of. But I think your question goes to that amazing footage last night - I don't know many of you stayed up and watched it, but it was compelling television. This video footage of these One Nation leaders travelling to America reminded me of that old show, Minder, on British TV - the British TV show, we had Arthur and Terry, they were always on the make. That was Arthur and Terry out there, in America representing Australian politics, and what a joke. Saying that they've got the proverbials of the government in one hand and for 10 or 20 million dollars they'll deliver eight Senate seats. One Nation is a circus and anyone who watched that video footage last night, you almost had to have your fingers over your eyes but you're peeking through still to watch the train crash which is extreme right wing politics in this country. Anyone who watched that video footage last night of two leaders of One Nation basically selling Australia's gun laws to the highest bidders, the National Rifle Association of America - anyone who watched that footage would know that you should put One Nation last.


QUESTION: What are your thoughts on the move by the PM to plunge $500 million on NDIS providers ahead of the Budget? The ABC understands that it will happen on Friday or Saturday.
ANSWER: Listen One Nation know what we think. Sorry we are going to put them last, and like-minded parties full stop. You know, and I know One Nation wants to preference the government. But they're essentially saying to the current government if we don't get your preferences then we will punish you. Well One Nation frequently threatens to put Labor below the Coalition. That's up to them. I don't care what they do. Just remember that video footage - if you ever want to talk about how this country should not be run, turn on that footage of these One Nation characters. On a racing term they’d be called colourful identities, colourful racing identities - they've travelled to America, showing values and views when they thought that no one could see them which are really not the values and views of Australian politics. You've got to ask yourself, what more does Mr Morrison need? He says they're abhorrent. You saw that video footage. It's incredible. I couldn't have written this stuff. And I don't think anyone here could have imagined it - selling out the Liberal Party's greatest pride and joy of the last 30 years, John Howard's gun laws, saying they've got the government by the proverbials and then saying for 10 or 20 million dollars I'll get you eight senators who will do what the gun lobby wants.


QUESTION: Will Labor offer financial incentives to energy companies that slash their greenhouse gas emissions?
ANSWER: I just think that's – has she said that? Really? Oh lord. That's just, people died there. That was a shocking, shocking act of evil. I have no time for that view. What we need to get out of Australian politics is the extremism.


QUESTION: Could I put a question to Jennifer about Michael Daly's comments. I don't know whether you've commented about what Michael Daley was recorded to have said in New South Wales. I realise it's another State but does that cause any grief for you here in Victoria? Does it influence people's opinions of Labor and what's your response to what Michael Daley said?
ANSWER: They'd get elected, the challenge is not to have them elected. I mean part of this problem really goes back to Mr Turnbull doesn't it when he wrecked the voting system in the Senate where he created optional preferential voting which meant that small parties didn't even need to get the votes they used to have to get, to get in.


QUESTION: Bill Shorten, 97 per cent of employers in this country are small and medium size. How can you be confident that this policy of lifting the minimum wage won't hurt their viability?
ANSWER: For us that's a bit of a hypothetical, they vote 90 per cent of the time with the government. So I tell you what we don't get a lot of votes from One Nation but that's not the issue here is it. The issue here is that you've seen two leaders, you know, Senator Hanson's right hand man and her left hand man - this Steve Dickson who I'm not sure was a household name certainly is now, he's their number one candidate for the Senate. Going to America saying "G'day how are you? Listen you can get eight Senators in Australia if you give us $10 million or $20 million".


QUESTION: While the corporate profits are up further the endless question for some of those smaller businesses you know maybe their profits aren't going up by 45 per cent so the issues of what they can afford would be real. In your changes to the law would the Fair Work Commission still take into account the state of the economy, the profitability of small businesses or other businesses so the sustainability of the increase would actually be a factor?
ANSWER: The unions are independent of us. Having said that you know my clear view and I've stated it to union leaders is yes, I know that traditionally you say you put the LNP last, but I think One Nation's performance in recent times and that Fraser Anning, I think they have to be put last.


QUESTION: Just one more for you sorry, Mr Shorten. Do you regret calling employers "fat cats" because you would know many of whom were offended by the comment?
ANSWER: Listen, what he does in his own time is his own business. But I am concerned that an Australian politician, a member of the government from north Queensland spends 42 weeks in the last four years overseas. Like the Australian worker gets four weeks annual leave a year. Mr Christensen seems to have pioneered the 11 week annual leave condition in the Australian workplace.


QUESTION: On a living wage policy, how would it affect the business like Tooheys that is actually owned by a multinational?
ANSWER: We will always look at proposals to improve our gun laws. We don't have specific proposals but having said that, we're not about to weaken them.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten are you satisfied with the Coalition’s response to the One Nation-NRA story that's around today. Should they be added to the Fraser Anning censure motion?
ANSWER: No I don't, I was surprised like a lot of people to hear about that $9 billion on detention centres- internment facilities. But leave aside the policy, what that tells you is that this government is leaking on their current Prime Minister.


QUESTION: What Michael Daley said about Asian-Australians, do you think those are appropriate comments for a Labor leader?
ANSWER: Well first of all, we've got, Labor is offering nearly 10 million Australian workers bigger, better, fairer, tax cuts. A married couple under our tax cuts, Mum might be earning $65,000, Dad might be on $80,000, under Labor in our first year they'll get nearly$6,000 back in our first three years of office.


QUESTION: But will the comments do damage federally in the election?
ANSWER: - Sorry, this is the one question they need to hear. What is it that this government's going to miraculously do in the next six weeks that they didn't do in the last six years? And if it's such a good idea why didn't they do it in the last six years and why did they pursue corporate tax cuts for business, $80 billion, $17 billion for the big banks for the last three years and waste the nation's time?


QUESTION: Did you pressure him to stand down?
ANSWER: We'll need to see what numbers the government bring down in their Budget. What we've got to do is make sure that the budget's sustainable, we've got to make sure that we reverse the cuts to schools and hospitals. I think it is appropriate to look at tax cuts for our working people in this country but also we need to help reduce the national debt.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the One Nation video - it was more than just touting for money, it was what they were going to do with it, which was to undermine - seemingly - the electoral process?
ANSWER: We think that we need to increase contributions so people don't retire poor. Of course, it's always up to what the economy can manage. Our number one priority of course is to reverse the cuts to penalty rates.


QUESTION: There was a ban on foreign donations that went through the Parliament. There’s always debate about further changes to donations law and maybe the One Nation video does highlight that. Would a Labor Government make any further changes to the way elections are funded, the way the donations laws work now?
ANSWER: Well, Budgets are normally in May but this government knows it has to have an election so it's going to rush an early Budget and they're just going to hope this budget holds together by rubber bands and sticky tape and ice cream sticks for the next five weeks. They don't want scrutiny on this Budget. So what they're going to try and do is after five and a half years of wrecking the system they are going to pretend in the next five weeks they can magic up this money like a unicorn and make it all happy as if the last five and a half years didn't happen.


QUESTION: Should One Nation be censured along with Fraser Anning?
ANSWER: We'll have more to say about our climate policy in the near future but just to remind you some of the good things that we're already doing, we've said that we want to move to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. We've said that we want to reduce our carbon pollution greenhouse gas emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. We want to be at zero net emissions by 2050.


QUESTION: Should Steve Dickson stand aside, he is the lead Senate candidate for Queensland.
ANSWER: Well, first of all, Michael Daley is no longer the leader of the New South Wales Labor Party. So I think he's stepped down, I think New South Wales Labor has shown that it didn't agree with the remarks and they shouldn't have been said. But beyond that going forward Labor has got an exciting set of propositions for all Australians including the Australian Chinese community. Jennifer Yang is one of my key advisers she's running in Chisholm. Labor is fielding more Chinese Australian candidates as part of our line up for election than we ever have before.


QUESTION: The government says that minimum wage increases have outstripped CPI increases so who’s right, you or them?
ANSWER: Thanks everybody, lovely chat.


QUESTION: Do you want the cloud of a leadership challenge or a leadership vote hanging over Labor during the entire federal campaign?
ANSWER: Thanks, that was Sam Crosby, Labor's candidate for Reid in the upcoming federal election in about 45, 46 days. This country works best when everyone gets a fair go. Not just the investment banker working in a skyscraper office, but the cleaner who cleans the investment banker’s office at night time. But the problem in Australia is at the moment is that for millions of Australian wage earners, they're experiencing wage stagnation - record low wages growth. When millions of wage earners are experiencing low wages growth - nobody wins.


QUESTION: There will still be people counting numbers and things like that though?
ANSWER: Thanks Brendan. Are there any questions on this or any other matters?


QUESTION: Just on social media companies, a push to have them face tougher penalties if they don't do the right thing. Do you think that is a good idea?
ANSWER: Evidence. The evidence is that lifting the wage actually will help stimulate economic growth. The reality is that when millions of wage earners are not experiencing wages growth everyone does it hard. Very recently 124 of Australia's most senior professors and doctors of economics in an unprecedented newspaper advertisement actually put an ad out saying we need to get wages moving.


QUESTION: Would a Labor Government legislate criminal sanctions against the social media companies in the way that the Morrison Government is canvassing?	ANSWER: Yes - I feel like just saying the
answer to that question is yes, but just to repeat – and I might just Brendan to supplement it. What we're proposing is two steps, the first step is for the commission to determine what a living wage is but I do issue the polite challenge to people here, do you all want to live on $18.93 an hour as an adult trying to pay your mortgage, look after your family? It’s too low but the commission will work that out, that's why we haven't put a number.


QUESTION: Is this a carbon copy of the Mediscare campaign you ran in 2016 election?
ANSWER: I think if you look at the actual quote that's not quite the context and I haven't had that view. This government loves to say that if you want wage rises for wage earners that somehow you're a class warrior that couldn't be anything further from the truth.


QUESTION: Are there are - sorry - are there any circumstances in which a Shorten Government would reintroduce a rebate freeze down the track?
ANSWER: Some other questions?


QUESTION: How can you assure Australians of this though given that Labor introduced the rebate or the rebate freeze when it was last in power?
ANSWER: First of all if you're paying well above the award it's going to have no impact. The point about here is they’re actually getting wage rises. But the reality is that not every company is structured like this business.


QUESTION: So will you guarantee that you won't introduce a rebate freeze?
ANSWER: I think that the shocking video footage of One Nation operatives travelling to America and conspiring with the National Rifle Association to raise money to undermine Australia's gun laws, I think that is shocking.


QUESTION: I've got another question. So the government signalled it will spend half a billion dollars on health before the election - will Labor match that?
ANSWER: I said yesterday, no I don't. And I said not only are they not appropriate to say, no one should be thinking this. So I think he's actually done the right thing and stepped down, showing some recognition and acceptance of the result on Saturday. And I'm confident that the Labor Party in New South Wales will regather after Saturday and start the process of rebuilding.


QUESTION: How do you fancy your chances here in Higgins?
ANSWER: Listen, I wasn't running for Premier, neither Gladys or Michael were running for Prime Minister. I think the federal election will be decided on federal issues. But let's not shirk the point, It wasn't appropriate, they shouldn't have been said. And Mr Daley has now done the right thing.


QUESTION: So how confident are you that you can win the seat?
ANSWER: Listen, New South Wales Labor ultimately made the decision. It's ultimately Mr Daley's consideration. He was the one who made the final decision. I did make clear though they shouldn't have been said, those comments in any circumstances.


QUESTION: Sorry  - how confident are you that you can win this seat? Thanks.
ANSWER: Listen if I didn't make clear how strongly I was horrified by what I saw, let me be very clear:  the idea of One Nation political party operatives going to the United States, seeking millions of dollars, promising to water down gun law protection in Australia, that was absolutely horrifying. I think it was a betrayal of the Australian political system. What are these right-wing extremists thinking?


QUESTION: Just quickly why did you drop Josh Spiegel?
ANSWER: I think we need a lot more transparency. Here is three changes; they've got to be made in real time, any amount over $1,000, the identity of the donor must be disclosed and we need a national anti-corruption commission. This government could do that next week.


QUESTION: Bill can I ask you, how important will Victoria be then to the next federal election?
ANSWER: We will consider that. I have, to be honest, I hadn't looked at that angle but we will consider that.


QUESTION: Just turning to New South Wales, do you think Michael Daley should step down now and how worried are you about a leadership challenge in New South Wales ahead of the federal election?
ANSWER: That's right, he is the lead Senate candidate. I forgot - listen, One Nation is a circus. They were dangerous circus and they've been caught out.


QUESTION: Okay we're weeks away from the federal election, why don't you say when negative gearing changes will be introduced?
ANSWER: If this government wants to debate about what a good job they've been doing on wages; bring it on. Let's go out to any high street anywhere in Australia and the government should say that they've been doing a good job on wages growth, and we’ll go out and run the no case and say that wages have been stagnating. Listen, the only people who think that they're doing a good job on wages growth are ministers and their staff. They're not in touch with what's happening in the real world.


QUESTION: Is that result in New South Wales a wakeup call though for Labor and are you worried about seats like Lindsay?
ANSWER: There is no cloud because frankly, all the processes that go into the New South Wales state election leadership have been put on hold till after the federal election.


QUESTION: When will you confirm your final position on using Kyoto credits towards a Paris climate target?
ANSWER: I think we want to talk about cloud over leadership, I don't know about you but I was a bit startled by the revelations I read in today's newspapers about the leaking on Mr Morrison from his left, from his right, from underneath, from on top of him.


QUESTION: Could I just ask you a question? Why didn't you get the swings then to you that you got in the Victorian election and what do you make of that result in New South Wales?
ANSWER: Listen if there's a constructive solution to seeing greater accountability on social media platforms, I'm up for it.


QUESTION: If I could just ask once about taxes please? There's talk of tax cuts in the federal budget. How big do tax cuts need to be for it to be worthwhile to most Australians?
ANSWER: The Morrison Government hasn't given us enough time to legislate anything. They've been running a witness protection racket for the government since the start of this year. The fact that they're going to race to an election two days after the budget’s brought down to avoid scrutiny. This government hasn't got time to do anything. They've run out of governing. So I love it when they say that they've got but his brand new idea. You and I both know they've got no intention of doing anything about it this side of the election. But if they do have a good idea, we'll look at it.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've given some interviews in recent days where you've spoken about what sort Prime Minister you'd hope to be. Is that clear indication that you believe that you will win the election?
ANSWER: Thanks Fiona. That was Fiona McLeod, Labor's new candidate for Higgins. I'm here with Jennifer Yang, Labor's candidate Chisholm and of course Catherine King our Shadow Minister for Health.


QUESTION: There is a $3 billion contingent liability in the budget at the moment for East-West Link. Would you -
ANSWER: Thanks Catherine, are there any questions on this?


QUESTION: Are you going to use that money to fund any of this work or will that be spent on something else?
ANSWER: Well I don't agree with the assumption of the question. What this is about is making sure that it's your Medicare card not your credit card which determines your health care in this country. Australians in the 1980s went without a wage rise to pay for Medicare, and we pay our Medicare levy as well, and people pay their taxes to Canberra. But what's happened is even though Australians have already paid for our health care system, this government has put the cost of the health care system back onto the burden of Australian families and their savings.


QUESTION: Just to be clear, if you're the Federal Infrastructure Minister post the Federal election, what would you do with that money? Would you -
ANSWER: No, we have no plans to do that. In fact I think one of the big lessons that we've seen in the course of this decade is that health is a number one issue. There are other important issues to people, I get that. But so long as Australians have got their health, and their family have got their health, then we can deal with everything else that life turns up. That's why Labor has made some serious economic reform decisions, because we are determined to be able to pay for the best health care system in the world. You know, I'm ambitious for Australia, not to have the best tax deductions and loopholes in the world, but to have the best quality health care and it starts with preventative health, and of course then it must fundamentally put GPs and patients at the centre of what we do. We want to have the best hospital system in the world. We've got to have a better aged care system than we're currently doing. So we see health care as a fundamental issue of a Labor government.


QUESTION: How does a result in New South Wales effect your campaign over the next 6 weeks?
ANSWER: What you're referring to is that the government made, the then government, made a decision to delay indexation from September of one year to line up for the next financial year of July. But I know what the Government's pushing - the government actually wants to get a magic wand out and make you forget the last five and a half years, as if it never happened. Well the current fellow who's the Prime Minister in three of his budgets he presided over cuts to Medicare. The current Health Minister, when he can put his head up from his frontline marginal seat in Flinders, is running around and blaming Labor for everything that he's been in charge - I mean you got to love these Liberal Ministers in Canberra - they take the wages, they take the limousines, they take all the top class benefits of being a Minister and then they want to blame Labor who's not in power.


QUESTION: But after being buoyed from the Victorian results, is this pretty average result for Labor in New South Wales a wakeup call?
ANSWER: We have absolutely no plans to introduce a freeze on the patient rebate. We want to fix the problem that they've been making.


QUESTION: Bill, Michael Daley's comments about Asians very damaging there in the last week. Does that leave your party with a lasting problem in that state?
ANSWER: We're going to spend more than the Government on health care. If the government wants to have a competition about who do you trust on health care and Medicare, I'm up for that contest. I mean, the government is sort of dropping heavy handed hints that the election will be on May the 11th. The real issue is the budget. What this government wants to do - and their tactics are pretty obvious aren't they - they've basically shut down Parliament for the first half of this year to avoid scrutiny on their record of cuts in health care. Then they're gonna have a budget where hey presto, they want to try and pretend that they haven't been the government for the last five and a half years – but you can trust them over their promises in the next five weeks.


QUESTION: Do you regret not being on the ground more in New South Wales? Do you personally regret not being on the ground in -
ANSWER: Well we've got the best candidate, we've got the best policies we're the most stable and united party and I think that when you look at the long term people are over the negativity of the last five and a half years, people want positive policies.


QUESTION: But why didn't you campaign more with Michael Daley?
ANSWER: Sorry, I might come back to you?


QUESTION: What do you think Mark Latham will bring to the New South Wales Parliament? Do you think he will be a valuable addition there?
ANSWER: Listen it's an uphill battle, Labor's never held Higgins. I mean Higgins is where - Higgins has always been, the Liberals have taken it for granted as a safe seat. But I just say to the voters of Higgins have a good look at the not only the curriculum vitae not only the accomplishments of Fiona McLeod, but have a look at why she's running and the values which motivate her and perhaps we might get her to explain. It's an uphill battle but I've got the best candidate, we've got the best policies, we're certainly united and we will put One Nation and extremist parties last which is what a lot of people in Higgins want to do. And we will take a fair dinkum climate change policy to the next election.


QUESTION: Would you like to see Michael Daley continue as the Labor Leader in New South Wales?	ANSWER: Oh, he's a lovely fellow, he's a lovely fellow and we're going to hear a lot more from Josh but you'll get an almost unique opportunity with Fiona McLeod and she can speak for herself. You know, head of the Law Council of Australia, head of the Australian Bar Association, but it's not even the achievements on paper.  Why don't we hear from her in a moment, Josh has got a great future and do you notice in the Labor Party we do things well. And yes, we replaced a man with a woman. I don't know if the Liberals have ever done that but I'll come back and
answer your other questions but there’s been a couple on Higgins. Fi?


QUESTION: Before we get back on to this project to the Premier, do you support the crackdown on the tech-giants, Bill? Or do you -
ANSWER: Thanks Fiona.


QUESTION: The Treasurer knocked down a plan this week to increase taxes on the tech giants. I think it was a new digital tax that they were looking at. Is that something you'd be open to?
ANSWER: Everywhere in Australia is important to me for the next election, we're chasing every vote everywhere. But Victoria is certainly a place where I think Labor's message is resonating well.


QUESTION: Are fines or convictions the answer in your mind, or do we need to have a discussion first?
ANSWER: Well that's a state election issue. I'm not running for Premier of New South Wales. But as I said yesterday, I congratulate Gladys Berejiklian. She's a more moderate Liberal and I suspect that those hard liners behind Peter Dutton and Tony Abbott and Morrison who got rid of Malcolm Turnbull must be realising that people don't like extremes in political parties.


QUESTION: Premier, real quick just back on this big spend. I know there's no final cost but how will we be paying our share?	ANSWER: We will
answer that within days and weeks. But fair's fair, we announced our negative gearing policy three and a half years ago. Like the Liberal Party, they're going to spring all sorts of little measures in this budget which they've only been thinking of because of focus group research in the previous month before the budget.


QUESTION: I'm just making sure that it would come out of the budget, not be fronted up by a private company and then we've got to pay for it 10 years -
ANSWER: It's always flattering to have your lines quoted back to the next day. I do think that all parties can learn from elections. I think fair minded commentators have agreed that it was fought on state issues with less federal implications. But I for one think you can always learn from every other experience. And for me what I've taken out of it, is the rise of these third parties. These third parties can't form governments. The people are protesting. And what that tells me is that if you just go negative and you've got nothing positive to say, people are going to switch off you. That's why we're outlining positive policies like today where we're saying to patients, under a Labor Government, your patient rebates are going to go up again after being frozen for the entire period of the Coalition Government.


QUESTION: What would you say are the main deficiencies in the current system when it comes to irrigation?
ANSWER: Very soon. We've already put out a lot of our climate and energy policies. We're committed to 50 per cent renewables by 2030. We're committed to reducing carbon emissions greenhouse gases by 45 per cent by 2030. By 2050, we want our nation to be a zero net carbon pollution emitter. We've also said that we want to help households with the family bills by encouraging a roll out of more batteries, so people can, the two million households who have already got solar rooftop can store that energy and we can encourage more people to go down that path. So in the very near future. I did also say in Tasmania on Saturday, where we were talking about our exciting new irrigation projects for agriculture in Tasmania, to make Tasmania one of the food bowls of Australian agricultural exports, I did say then that we're seriously considering what some of the more progressive nations have done; the United Kingdom, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, New Zealand and not using the Kyoto credits. But we haven't got to a final position and we're taking expert advice.


QUESTION: Is there an expectation that Tasmania will take on a greater portion of the nation's agriculture in the coming years due to extreme weather events on the mainland that don't effect Tasmania as much?
ANSWER: I'm not to be a commentator on state elections. As I said, I'm not running for State Premier but I've got no doubt that perhaps people thought that Premier Berejiklian was a moderate Liberal. They hadn't had the leadership instability that their Federal partners have had. But I also think that in the case of Dan Andrews, he had a very strong story to tell too.


QUESTION: The Turkish President has again played the Christchurch shooting video. How can you believe that he was misquoted, as he said, when he is continuing to play this video?
ANSWER: That's a hard question because every Australian's circumstances are different. But probably the nearest - we'll have to wait and see what's in the budget although - they have moved the budget forward by a month and they've made sure that there's going to be little scrutiny of the budget after they bring it down. So their tactic is clear: 'Let's just try and get through the six weeks and hope people forget the cuts to schools and hospitals in the last five years'.


QUESTION: The Christchurch shooter was active on social media platforms in far right groups for quite a while before the terrorist attack. How could have this gone unnoticed by Australia's intelligence agencies (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Good morning, everybody. It's great to be here with Premier Andrews, shadow spokesperson Anthony Albanese and a range of our Labor candidates and members at both the State and Federal level.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, great see you in Tasmania but why aren't you in New South Wales helping Labor's campaign?
ANSWER: Thanks very much, Anthony. Are there any questions on this announcement or any other matters?


QUESTION: Do you feel your presences wouldn't help Labor there? Do you feel you presence detracts from Labor -
ANSWER: No. It's a clear indication I want people to vote for Labor at the next election.


QUESTION: Labor MPs in New South Wales have admitted that they have had a poor week of campaigning. Can Michael Daley recover, do you believe?	ANSWER: Well why don't I'll let Anthony
answer this, he is clearly gunning to.


QUESTION: Do you see this state election as a test run for the federal election?	ANSWER: I'm might just say in the light, just momentarily as you collect your next questions and reflect on what Anthony said, and that goes to
answering again, your earlier question, this is why Labor's competitive: we've got more unity, we've got more talent and we've got more vision, and that clearly is the case in infrastructure.


QUESTION: On climate change, why is it taking Labor so long to say if it will use carbon carry-over credits?
ANSWER: I think it'd be fair to say that there weren't many federal implications, but rarely is there an election that you can't learn something from. You know, I've been thinking about it overnight, and the rise of some of those smaller parties and independents show that no major party can take the voter for granted. And I actually think that the challenge, or the lesson, for me out of yesterday, is to keep putting forward a long term view of the nation, to keep putting forward vision. It's not enough to rely on the fact that you're not the other party, that you've got to offer a positive set of plans.


QUESTION: On the AFL, the state Government is starting a taskforce to lobby for a Tas-AFL team. Labor has already made a funding commitment of seed funding. The $25 million that you've committed, would that be available for the AFL (inaudible) or a specific condition attached to how that is used?	ANSWER: Well again, I'd probably refer you to my previous
answer. I think when you have a look at the debates they were having a New South Wales, it was about stadiums, it was about the treatment of the bush in New South Wales. But you know, no one should ever say there's nothing to learn.


QUESTION: So could some of that money from Labor be used to upgrade the Bellerive oval?
ANSWER: No. I've spoken to Michael Daley. He's the first to acknowledge that his comments were wrong and I've certainly said that to him. I think he paid a price for that.


QUESTION: Is it time the AFL gave Tasmania a clear answer (inaudible)? Should they stop stringing Tasmania along?
ANSWER: I was very flattered that they asked me to speak at their launch. At least there was one major party leader speaking. Again though, I think you'd fairly say that there were a lot of state issues and that is the consensus. But you know, I think every election is a wakeup call and you've got to make sure you're offering strong vision, strong policies. I think even our harshest critics wouldn't say that we've been a small target opposition though, would they?


QUESTION: Just on the Banking Royal Commission, do you support the Government's plan to create a new division in the federal court system to include criminal prosecutions for the sector?
ANSWER: Sorry, I don't accept your assumption. I was up there six times. But also, I'm not running for Premier of New South Wales, and if I was, you would have seen a lot more of me.


QUESTION: Could I have one more on AFL?
ANSWER: Well, he brings his Federal parliamentary pension, but, I don't know. I find that talking about Mark Latham takes us nowhere.


QUESTION: If you're elected at the federal election, would Federal Labor be  willing to work with the Tasmanian Liberal state government in a bipartisan way to get up an AFL team?
ANSWER: That will be a matter for New South Wales. Listen, Michael came in, 80-plus days, steep climb, did his best but I think even as your question's acknowledging, he hit some rough road in the last 10 days.


QUESTION: Can I bring you back, one more question, to today's announcement. What are you offering that the Liberal Morrison Government hasn't already offered?
ANSWER: Yeah, we've been certainly talking about that in the light of Christchurch, it's a shocking wake up call to say that our major social media platforms, the new media, can't regard themselves as beyond the arm of regulation. I mean if you in the old media, probably some of the things that they allow on their platforms, you'd be in court. You've got to think about what happens before you publish.


QUESTION: Is it not king of expected they would given they funded the first two?
ANSWER: We haven't seen what the Government's plans are. We're always open to being constructive.


QUESTION: It's a question for Fiona. How long have you been a member of the Labor Party and why Labor?
ANSWER: Well I think it's all of the above, isn't it? And let's be clear, it's not just social media. I think existing media need to make sure that they're not encouraging hate speech. I think it's important that politicians, especially the mainstream politicians, work together to stop extremism.


QUESTION: Who is that, sorry?
ANSWER: Thanks Justine. It's great to be here in Forth today at Mike's farm. I'd like to acknowledge that what I'm about to say is due to a lot of the lobbying of Justine and of course, Ross and Brian, Labor's team in the north and north west of Tasmania.


QUESTION: Labor got less than 15 per cent of the primary vote in Higgins three years ago. What has changed so dramatically that you think you could actually win?
ANSWER: Are there any questions about this exciting announcement or any other matters?


QUESTION: When it comes to how to vote cards will you be putting One Nation last on all of those cards?
ANSWER: Well, we see it happening right behind us. You go for months where there's no rain and all of a sudden you get the rain but it's not in the right place sometimes, it's not where we need it. So the irrigation system will allow a whole lot of land to be developed which currently isn't. When you were with us on the tour, you might have noticed as we're looking towards Devonport, you could see a lot of the drier land between here and Devonport. Irrigation just opens it all up. What's remarkable about the productivity of this land is in the broccoli paddocks we were in, something like 200 tonnes of broccoli is going to come out of that crop. When we were in the carrot fields, 800 tonnes of carrots. Tasmania, nothing can hold it back except a lack of imagination on behalf of Canberra. We're here to change that.


QUESTION: Your candidate has just said that climate change is an existential threat. Why is Labor still considering using a so called accounting trick to meet its emissions targets?
ANSWER: I think the times suit Tasmania. I mean look at this amazing land, not too many frosts now are there?  So Tasmania's well-placed. When you look at it, what you need is you need good land, you've got that. If we can solve the water problem then that's the next tick of the box. Then what we need is good linkages into Asia. Labor's got a policy called FutureAsia, we intend to deepen our trade links with Asia. We intend to refurbish and revitalise airport infrastructure. But the missing link here is a commitment to the third tranche of irrigation projects. We've already seen what the first two tranches have delivered, and imagine what we can do with a third.


QUESTION: Scott Morrison says Sally McManus has been attending Shadow Cabinet meetings. I think Sally has denied that online what's the truth and would that be appropriate?
ANSWER: I've seen reports of that this morning. That's deeply frustrating. The Turkish officials, I complained to them and I supported Mr Morrison in the same process. They said that it had been misquoted, that there is Turkish elections. I think they conclude in the next eight days or several days. I certainly would expect that once the election was over that things are normalised again. There's no excuse for disrespecting our ANZACS. Of course, I also wonder if there is an element of domestic politics being played out here with those shocking scenes in Christchurch. And I would expect our relations to improve, but it is disturbing to see the images being repeatedly replayed. It's not on, it's not appropriate and it's not the basis of the relationship which we've had really since the end of the First World War with the modern Republic of Turkey.


QUESTION: What do you make of Scott Morrison's $2 billion dollar announcement to build a high speed rail between Melbourne and Geelong? Good idea, will Labor match it?
ANSWER: I think that's a pretty important point. I think the security agencies do need to explain how they're monitoring the far-right. I know that they've been monitoring some of them but clearly this fellow hasn't attracted the attention of security agencies in Australia or New Zealand. We need to make sure that that never happens again. And I believe that we need to put more resources into combating the extreme right. They've proven that their ideology is just as hateful as any of the other extremism we see around the world. There's no excuse for them not getting the same attention. They proved how dreadful what they can do is.


QUESTION: So  you've got two though, high speed rails are now being discussed for Melbourne one to Geelong one all the way up to Brisbane. Which of these if any will Labor commit to?
ANSWER: Because the election's today. I've been up in New South Wales. I have to say at midday on election day, there's not much more you can do to sort out the voting there.


QUESTION: Do you think Pauline Hanson is a racist?
ANSWER: No, I was pleased to campaign there. It was very nice of New South Wales Labor to ask me to speak at the launch of their campaign. At least one major party leader go to address the people.


QUESTION: What do you think about Michael McCormack urging now people to put the Greens last?
ANSWER: We'll find out. At this point, your guess is as good as mine. So we'll see, but it's now in the hands of the voters.


QUESTION: Just on IFM Investors, is a bonus of $26 million there abouts okay?
ANSWER: I think there's plenty of federal issues which will be the subject of the federal election. I think a lot of these New South Wales state issues were fought on state matters, stadiums and whatnot.


QUESTION: Why don't we know? Shouldn't industry funds disclose what their executives are getting given the ethos and criticism of CEO bonuses (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Well first of all, if we're going to talk about why it's taken so long for a political party to do something, why has it taken six years for this government to still do nothing at all when they're in government on climate change? I mean, if the Liberals wanted to do anything on climate change, Malcolm Turnbull would still be Prime Minister, wouldn't he? I mean they're now on their 12th energy policy.


QUESTION: Will you be swapping preferences with the Greens in this seat?
ANSWER: We want to see, listen, I'm an AFL fan, although Collingwood was a little unlucky last night. It's alright, it's only the start of the season. But, we've said that we would put $25 million aside provided the AFL came to the party. But we don't want that being a fly in-fly out team, we want to see it based in Tasmania.


QUESTION: Can I just get one for Fiona?
ANSWER: Well, let's see what the business case for the team is first. I don't want to run a football club, I want to run Australia. I'll leave that to the experts. But what I want to see in Tassie is grassroots footy. You've got a very strong tradition, but what we've got to do is make sure that the grassroots are functioning well, and that's women's football as well as men's football and the junior teams. But I'm sure we can get it right in terms of amenities and facilities, but it's got to start with Tassie football.


QUESTION: You mentioned that you were disappointed about the Coalition’s response to the voice statement, do you agree with the idea of having a representative body for Indigenous people?
ANSWER: I think Tasmanians are in two minds. I think they would all like the idea of a genuinely local AFL team, but I think they're just as concerned about grassroots footy. And I think there's an attitude which is we’ll believe it when we see it. So I've got a couple of propositions for Tasmanian footy lovers. One, if you want to see more junior teams supported, vote Labor. If you want to see more women's footy, vote Labor. If you want to see investment in grassroots footy, vote Labor. I will work with Tasmanian footy and our Tasmanian MPs. We will say to the AFL: time to get serious. But you know, if you want the AFL to get serious, you need a friend in Canberra to make sure they get serious about Tassie football. I’m that man.


QUESTION: Fiona do you live in the seat of Higgins?
ANSWER: We're open to this idea but you've got to ask yourself, why has it taken the Government so long to do these measures? I mean, they didn't have to vote against a Banking Royal Commission 26 times. This government, for the last three years, has spent a lot of political time and effort trying to give a $17 billion tax cut to the banks. So you know, now they want to look like they're the good guys after they voted against the Banking Royal Commission 26 times, after wanting to give $17 billion in tax cuts to the banks. Now they want to look like the good guys, after they cut money from the corporate regulators? Just imagine if they hadn't cut money from the regulators, maybe some of the problems that we saw in the Banking Royal Commission wouldn't have occurred.


QUESTION: Where do you live?
ANSWER: Sure.


QUESTION: If you are elected then that gives you three years or so to move here, so will you commit to moving here if you are elected then?
ANSWER: Listen, it is the local government down here that has said they want to put $70 million into tranche three of the irrigation and it's a Labor Opposition who's got on the plane, courtesy of my local Labor MPs, and said we've got to back this. For me, it's about putting the farmers first, politics second. The same goes with footy. The reality is that it was in Justine's campaign in Braddon, where we made the commitment to AFL funding. If the Tasmanian Government's fair dinkum, I'll work with them.


QUESTION: That's not a commitment though is it?
ANSWER: They haven't offered to do the third tranche of the irrigation funding.


QUESTION: Do you see that as a disadvantage? I mean people often like to look to a local candidate who's been living in the community and understands local issues.
ANSWER: Oh mate, well sorry, it was the Labor government who funded the initial tranche. Listen, Mr Morrison's welcome to copy us. That's okay, that's politics. This is what's so interesting about Labor being so competitive in the federal election, and it is what's so good about having such a crack-team of federal MPs, is that we're leading. It's a very unusual dynamic in Australian politics where the Opposition goes first and the Government plays catch up. But that's been the story of the last five years, more often than not, especially when it comes to Tasmania.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, are these initiatives all affordable, fully funded or - we're clearly in campaign mode mode now, so cross crossing the country dropping millions here and there, is there a danger this election campaign will send Australia broke?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten and Premier McGowan, can I ask as part of your joint-cabinet meeting, was there any questions raised about the EPA decision earlier in the week and were there any definitions sorted about what Labor's emissions policy would be going forward and what would be responsible?
ANSWER: Thanks Fiona. Good words. Are there any questions?


QUESTION: Should Australia move back its ambassador from Ankara?
ANSWER: What happened to Malcolm Turnbull? I'll tell you what's changed in the last three years, we're on our third Liberal Prime Minister. They are just an unstable rabble. Wherever you go - and you know I'm a Victorian - wherever I went in Victoria over the summer past, people would come up to me and say 'Bill, I'm a lifelong Liberal'. They don't agree with everything that we're saying but they say 'for goodness sakes, can't we just have one Prime Minister for three years' and they acknowledge that we are the party of stability.


QUESTION: DFAT is reviewing travel (inaudible) would it be a shame if Australians are forced to cancel travel to ANZAC Day at Gallipoli?
ANSWER: Yes. I can say again today that the Labor Party will preference the Liberals ahead of One Nation. One Nation - or, I mean if there's three different extreme right wing parties one of them goes last, one of  them goes second last, one of them goes third last. But as the general principle we're putting the extremists at the bottom. And even though you know, Scott Morrison I don't see eye to eye on many issues I accept that the Liberal Party is a much more mainstream party, although it's got some unfortunate tendencies to the right.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Chamber of Commerce has put out some research on the potential impact of your government, a future government endorsing the ACTU’s living wage and the adverse impact on jobs, and related to that, there's also been a lot of concern about your closeness to some of the militant maritime and construction unions. What can you say about the concerns of people in the business community about wage increases and your relationship with unions?
ANSWER: Well, be a bit fair in your question I've said that we're taking that question on notice and we're going to announce our policy on climate change before the next election.


QUESTION: Will you be sticking to the 160,000 migration cap for the next four years if you are elected?
ANSWER: I would have thought the last day in the world that Mr Morrison wanted to talk about what happened at a Shadow Cabinet meeting would have been today after his own people are contradicting each other and him.


QUESTION: So do you think that migrants should be incentivised to move into the regions though?
ANSWER: Well as I said, I've lived in Victoria for half a century. It's almost like he's declared the elections on isn't it? How do you know when there's going to be a federal election,  the Liberal Party discover infrastructure in Victoria. What a coincidence.


QUESTION: Who is leading the cost of flying the entire Shadow Cabinet into Perth this week?
ANSWER: There's been a lot more work done on the high speed rail between Melbourne and Brisbane. The real issue for me when it comes to Geelong and I'm not going to bury any idea no matter how fortuitous the timing is for the Liberals six weeks before an election. The real issue is that on the other side of Geelong from Armstrong's Creek right along the coast we've seen massive suburban expansion. What we want to do is make sure that the train services between the Surf Coast and Geelong are better.


QUESTION: So that's taxpayers?
ANSWER: I think some of the things that she's said have been racist. I don't think that Islam is a cancer. I think some of the things she's said don't reflect the thinking of mainstream Australia.


QUESTION: But does it take every Shadow Minister, isn't Bill Shorten enough to make all those announcements?
ANSWER: Oh well, the National Party they're more lost than Burke and Wills. There are just wandering around trying to get any attention they can.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten what are the chances of having a West Australian in your Cabinet?
ANSWER: I'm not familiar with the issue.


QUESTION: Premier can you put a cost value on Chris Hemsworth’s video travelling the state and was it worth the price tag of his holiday?
ANSWER: Well first of all, I still don't know any more than I did before your last question. But on the general issue of executive bonuses yeah I think they can be too high. I think there should be transparency generally.


QUESTION: So how soon do you expect a return, when should tourism numbers to WA be increasing, becasue they've been stagnant.
ANSWER: Yeah, I mean we do that, we've put forward a recommendation the Victorian branch will work that through. But if there's an implication somehow there is something special - Labor intends to win the election. We're not going to form coalitions with the Greens or anyone else.


QUESTION: When - is there a deadline? Would you expect to see vast improvement in 12 months, 24 months, before the state election?
ANSWER: You know I haven't given that a lot of thought. I like her music, I'm not the sort of fanboy that the current Prime Minister is but that's fair enough. In terms of appointments to these committees I think the more transparent we can do it, the more arm's length the better. She's a very well credentialed Australian. Her parents live in my electorate.


QUESTION: Are you spending money here?
ANSWER: Yeah sure mate.


QUESTION: Premier one of your members floated the idea of lowering the blood alcohol limit for drivers from 0.05 to zero, a flat zero. Is that discussion - is it time to have that discussion yet?
ANSWER: Thanks everybody, are there any other questions? So I just want to say to the voters of Higgins and right across Victorian Australia.


QUESTION: The limit at the moment, do you see it as effective and safe?
ANSWER: Good morning everybody and thank you Premier Mark McGowan for hosting a historic meeting, a joint cabinet meeting of the West Australian Government and the Federal Shadow Cabinet. You know, we had the meeting today and it was a good exchange of ideas and views, a discussion about a vision for Western Australia. I actually think we need to see more of this across the nation - the different levels of government working together. That's what I can promise West Australians - that if I'm elected Prime Minister in six or seven weeks, you're going to see more cooperation and more making sure that Western Australia gets its fair share.


QUESTION: It's going to be the up to the State Government (inaudible)
ANSWER: Well let's not be cavalier about our announcements and it's an important question but I don't accept the assumption that these are just drops or issues, or just election matters. Ever since I became leader of the Labor Party I've said that violence against women, domestic violence has to be a national issue. So this is part of Labor DNA to tackle domestic violence, and the McGowan Government's already doing it. We've costed our promises because we've made economic reform decisions. We've decided that we want to have better jobs not bigger tax loopholes. When it comes to mining this is a very judicious use of $23 million to enable, to facilitate, to exponentially improve the opportunities for mining, oil and gas across the nation, of which Western Australia is such a key part. Doubling the number of Indigenous rangers, it’s not the most expensive policy you've heard - but we know it works. We want to create real jobs for Indigenous Australians. And of course training the workforce for the future, each of these TAFE facilities we're going to upgrade is about $1.85 million, but when we know that we've got 10,000 positions to fill in the west, how smart would it be not to provide the TAFE facilities? And this is the secret of TAFE, which this Government never understands, the Federal Government. TAFE is a marvellous engine room for retraining people. Come with me someday and visit the TAFEs, see the mature age workers who've come back from having kids go back into the workforce. Come to me when we go to the various TAFEs and see young people learning to be the tradespeople of the future.


QUESTION: Is there any double up? Would it cancel out the future batteries then that you are trying to get funding for?
ANSWER: Nick, three points - one, Premier Mark McGowan has handled this issue very well I think.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten the Prime Minister has condemned comments by Michael Daley in a video that surfaced online. What do you make of the comments, and will you do the same?
ANSWER: I've contacted Prime Minister Morrison this morning and offered my support for a joint approach.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Mr McGowan can I ask you both would you support greater regulation of social media such as Facebook and Twitter, to deal with the promotion of hate speech and political extremist messages?
ANSWER: Of course it would be a shame. I asked the ambassador, the Turkish Ambassador, his view about the safety of Australians and New Zealanders. He said nothing had changed there but I'll be guided by DFAT's advice. I just want to say to Australians, when it comes to these matters, when other countries, for whatever intemperate or whatever reason, insult our country, then I will work with the Prime Minister of the day and that's what people in Australia expect of us both.


QUESTION: Premier, have you formally asked [inaudible] and if they refuse to go, what will you do?
ANSWER: Well first of all let's talk about wages. I reject the fairy tale spun by the vested interests of big business which says that reasonable wage rises cause economic dislocation. You know, there was an ad in the newspapers yesterday, I don't know if you saw it in the Financial Review, I don't know if you got to see it. It was 124 economists - 124 professors and doctors of economics who said we need to get wages moving in this country. The Reserve Bank Governor - and I don't think you can call him a shop steward of the MUA, he has said that we need to move on wages. Wage stagnation is without a doubt one of the principal economic problems in this country. Let's be straight about this: corporate profits have gone up in Australia by 45 per cent in the last four years, 45 per cent. Average wages in this country have gone up by 8 per cent. That isn't fair, it's not the way the system should work.


QUESTION: So how will you stop people going in there, tourists or others?
ANSWER: Yes I've seen that the current Prime Minister has said that you know - he has come out, burst out of the blocks today said look at me, I'm going to say that we're going to have migration at 160,000 people a year. Well it sounds like the sort of cut that you have when you want to pretend you're having a cut, but you also know that you need to have immigration to help the economy grow. I mean this is smoke and mirrors. 160,000 this year, do you know what it was last year? 162,000 - so wow, this government's announced a cut of 1 per cent, you know hold the presses, it's staggering. They want people to go to the regions - tick, that's fine. We've all spoken about that and that's a good idea. But let us not pretend that today was earth shattering news.


QUESTION: [inaudible]
ANSWER: We're always happy to look at what schemes get people to the regions. This is not new. Any student of economic history since Federation and before, knows that we've had schemes to try and get people to work in the regions. So this is not news, and it's always proven quite difficult and we'll have a very constructive view about that but again, this is hardly radical. If you want to create jobs in the regions, back in our Indigenous rangers program. If you want to back jobs in the regions, sort out the national energy policy. If you want to back jobs in the region, back our buy Australia procurement plans for Australian made railway stock, in Queensland for example. If you want to back jobs in the regions, back in our plan to make a hydrogen research centre in Gladstone. If you want to back our jobs in the regions, do like we're doing and invest in hospitals in regional Western Australia. I mean, Mark McGowan, he's on the ground. People don't want to go to the regions unless there's a job there. So what we've got to do is create the jobs.


QUESTION: What do you think of Fraser Anning's egging yesterday?
ANSWER: Well, the same people who meet the cost of flying the entire government around the country.


QUESTION: I've got two questions - two topics to cover (inaudible).
ANSWER: I appreciate the compliment inherent in that. Well let's be straight here, politicians in Canberra need to get out of Canberra and travel around. You know this is my 74th day in Western Australia and some might like that, some might not like that, some might not have a view. But you can't work out Western Australia from the East Coast. The last thing West Australians want is wise men and women from the East pontificating on fly-in fly-out day trips telling people what they need. You've got to be on the ground.


QUESTION: (inaudible)
ANSWER: Good if you can vote for them. We are competitive, people like to ask me here how many seats are you going to win? Well I'm trying to get every vote I can get, everywhere. You know we proposed upgrading and sorting out and renovating and fixing up the Collie Hospital. Now that is theoretically in a Federal Seat which Labor doesn't have any prospects of, but I am a very ambitious fellow for making sure that Labor does as well as we can. So when I come to Western Australia, I don't look at blue seats or red seats, I just see Western Australians, in the regions and of course in Perth. You can't understand Western Australia without understanding the wheat belt, the mining districts, the South West you know, the Goldfields, Central Western Australia. So we are very keen regardless of our electoral chances to have the best possible policies.


QUESTION: Thank you.
ANSWER: I do see the irony, we did bring some of our Federal MPs across so you know we're doing our bit for Western Australia.


QUESTION: In terms of Facebook, what responsibility do you think social media giants like that have to stop broadcasting material like this?
ANSWER: Yeah, sure we are.


QUESTION: What part does the Government have to play in assisting someone like Facebook then?
ANSWER: Well first of all there's a state election on Saturday, and Mr Daley has himself dealt with this matter and he's apologised for the remarks. What I do actually see is an important test for our current Prime Minister is this issue of how to treat extreme right wing parties in Australia. I agree with what the Prime Minister said on one of his outings this week where he said there's too much tribalism in Australia and we've got to be more sensible or moderate. That's why I then said that under me, the Labor Party will always put the Liberals and Nationals ahead of One Nation and Fraser Anning. Not because Mr Morrison or the government's policies are anything that I support. But at the some time, we've just, at some point in the political debate in Australia we've got to call time on the rubbish and the extremists.


QUESTION: And a further question on Fraser Anning please, do more politicians need to rethink the language they use in relation to refugees and migration?
ANSWER: Well I do think this is an overdue debate. Just like we need to actually shut the door on the extremists, on those that would divide our society, we now have to have the overdue conversation about the massive power that the technology leviathans exert in Australia. Love you or hate you in the current media and the traditional media, you know, you have to think about what you publish before you publish it as a general rule. And the point of that is that you are accountable to community standards. There are laws. But these big media platforms the Google's, Facebook, the stuff goes up, the hate goes out and then after that, then maybe they'll take it down. You know there's a very strong story today in the West Australian showing that Facebook was still putting material out. It has got to stop. Do you really think that these social media giants who they know what your kids ate for breakfast, they know where you're booking your next holiday, they know what your favourite you know, shopping lists are. Do you really think they can't do more to stop the digital hitmen and the trolls of the underbelly of social media from carrying out their business. So I'm going to meet with the social media companies and they have to explain what are they going to do better. The status quo is unacceptable.


QUESTION: Yes, so Mr Shorten given your stated support for a living wage does Labor support the ACTU claim for a $43 a week increase in the minimum wage?	ANSWER: Listen I was just going to say, you've been very generous with your questions and very patient with our
answers but all good things feel like they come to an end. So see you all a bit later.


QUESTION: Can you explain in simple terms how wages would be higher under Labor?
ANSWER: Thanks, Tim Watts, local Member for Gellibrand.


QUESTION: You said you would change legislation to set the minimum wage, would that legislation enable you to direct the Fair Work Commission?
ANSWER: Listen, the young man who egged him, that was a mug thing to do. You don't get your message out by coming up and crunching an egg on someone. That's just stupid. But when I also saw – so I've got no time for that, doesn't matter what rubbish that the politician was spouting, you don't want to give this foolish politician, this hurtful politician, any sense of the moral high ground, because he has none.


QUESTION: (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Good Fi.


QUESTION: Does the Fair Work Commission remain the independent umpire if the guidelines have been tweaked by the Coalition Government?
ANSWER: I'll do the non-Christchurch questions in a moment. Did you have any on that?


QUESTION: So you are satisfied with the capacity of Fair Work to set wage rises?	ANSWER: Okay, just on just on Milo Yiannopoulos. You've got to ask the Government, the department said don't let this character in and the Government Ministers overruled the department. Now they've changed their mind after Christchurch. What is it that Milo Yiannopoulos has said after Christchurch that he wasn't saying before Christchurch? He shouldn't have been allowed in, you should've listened to the department, you've got to the right answer now, but it shouldn't take the events in New Zealand for the Government to get the
answer right


QUESTION: So back to changing those guidelines then what would that like? Would the Fair Work Commission still retain that independence?
ANSWER: Social media and the Internet's a fantastic development. It allows us to be exposed to ideas, to connect, to break down isolation. It's a fantastic development. But the big media platforms do have an obligation to, I think, better monitor and prevent hate speech. The way that the big media platforms sell themselves to their customers, is they say to their customers who they want to buy advertising on Facebook and whatever else, they say, we know everything about the users of Facebook , we can tell you everything, you can geo-target and you can market. Their whole business model is to tell their customers that they know everything about their social media users. Well if that's your business model, fair enough, but you can't go missing and not know what they're saying when it comes to hate speech.


QUESTION: But how, what would it look like, how would you change it?
ANSWER: I think this is a collective exercise. This isn't a Liberal, Labor or partisan exercise. It's been two days since Christchurch but - and there's families, people still fighting for their lives, New Zealand is trying to you know, just so much immediate grief and shock to get through - but we've got to learn the lessons. We keep saying we've got to learn the lessons through the radicalisation of people. Well, we're running out of time to learn the lessons. And how many more people have to die before we recognise that we've got to be a lot better?


QUESTION: Just on energy, Labor has pledged an economy-wide 45 per cent emissions cut, but cuts are easier to make in energy. Will you rule out a higher emissions target on energy than 45 per cent to allow lower targets in transport and agriculture?
ANSWER: I think most politicians are not like Fraser Anning. Thank God. There's only a very few like him pop up. But I think the debate needs to be more respectful. And this really goes to that question of what sort of nation do we want to be. Do we want to be a nation who tells the majority to be scared of minorities? Do we want to be a country who says that we need to be nervous and scared of a few hundred people coming here? Do we want to be a nation which says that if someone worships a different God, has a different sexual identity, has a different political view, that somehow we've got to be scared and nervous? We shouldn't be. Australia is a great country. This man, Brenton Tarrant, does not represent Australia but he comes from us. We should be a country who needs to be more confident in ourselves.


QUESTION: But do you rule out a 45 per cent target for transport and agriculture?
ANSWER: Australians and New Zealanders are brothers and sisters. So today, we mourn for our New Zealand brothers and sisters.


QUESTION: The workers here at Woolies are on an EBA not the minimum wage. What would you do to boost their wages?
ANSWER: Thanks Tim, and it's great to be doing an event in my own electorate of Maribyrnong. I'm here of course  with my neighbouring MP, Tim Watts and exciting new federal Labor candidate for the seat of Fraser in Melbourne's west Daniel Mulino.


QUESTION: Just back on energy, I've asked you this before and you said you were consulting. Is there any update on if Labor does win the election, will it be using carbon credits from Kyoto Protocol?
ANSWER: Labor will outline more of our approach on the minimum wage in coming days. We're not committing to a particular number and whilst the unions are entitled to make a claim they see fit, that's not our position. But where we have a common position is that the minimum wage should be higher than what it is now, and what we're going to do to improve people's wages is through a raft of practical and real measures. We want to restore the penalty rates which were arbitrarily cut. We want to make sure that labour hire workers who work alongside in-house workers of companies and businesses are paid the same rate of pay. We want to make sure that subcontractors who are the backbone of the Australian economy don't get ripped off by dodgy directors. We want to make sure that temporary visa workers in Australia are not being exploited. We  want to stop wages theft occurring across businesses where workers are being systematically ripped off and we want to make sure that Australian women when they go to work, get paid the same as Australian men. This is measures for our wages policy and we'll have more to say about other aspects of our wages policy as we get closer to an election.


QUESTION: Any time frame on that?
ANSWER: Penalty rates would be restored. Pay equity cases in feminised industries, we'll make sure that women get a better deal equivalent to their male counterparts in other industries. We'll make sure that labour hire workers when they work alongside in-house workers in the media, in the airline industry, in warehousing, in retail, get paid the same as the people they work alongside who are directly employed by the company. What we'll also do is we’ll look after subcontractors. There's too much corporate insolvency in Australia where company directors are paid money to do work, they have promised the subcontractor who does the work for them that they'll get reimbursed - but what happens is the company director leaves town, doesn't pay the debts owed to the subcontractor. So they are all practical measures to make sure that we can lift wages.


QUESTION: It is rapidly approaching.
ANSWER: Oh no we want, the way wages, the way that the award wages get set is that the independent umpire sets them.  But what happens is that the independent umpire has guidelines in their principals they apply to look at the evidence. It's completely standard business for national governments to from time to time update the guidelines that we give to the independent umpire.


QUESTION: Just finally, do you agree with Michael Daley saying that students should be allowed to skip school for those climate change rallies?
ANSWER: Pardon?


QUESTION: Sorry, I just wanted to ask you about children caught up in the Syria -
ANSWER: The Fair Work Commission is subject to the legislation of the Parliament, the Parliament is sovereign and I think we've had a very good system in Australia which has worked better than not over previous decades. Australia was very proud of making sure that working people in this country got a fair go. I mean, we don't want to go down the American path where everyone's on day-hire. Where you've got to hope that your health insurance is paid by the employer otherwise you go without proper health care.


QUESTION: And if their parents are foreign fighters. What do you think should happen to them should? Shouldn't they be allowed back in Australia?
ANSWER: Yes, I am satisfied in the general they are. You know once every 20 years they get it wrong, they got the penalty rates decision wrong, 25 years ago they didn't want to introduce superannuation in awards and a Labor Government had to legislate to create superannuation. But I think having an independent process based upon evidence is the way to go.


QUESTION: So do you think the children should be allowed to return to Australia?
ANSWER: Absolutely.


QUESTION: The Federal Government's locked away $3 billion dollars in funding for the east-west link. If you win government, what would you like to see done with that money and have you spoken to Dan Andrews about it?
ANSWER: The Fair Work Commission is a creature of legislation. So parliament's pass laws, we want an independent umpire but can we go back to what the real issue is here. This government has never seen a wage rise they support for millions of Australians. You know, they'll do - they'll talk about anything else, they'll promise practically anything else, but they don't have a wages policy. So what we say very clearly is that everything is going up in Australia except people's wages.  We acknowledge that's real, we can't fix every problem but we can and we should do something about wages. That's why we're going to reverse the penalty rate cuts. That's why we're going to crack down on dodgy labour hire and some of the other measures that we've discussed to some of your previous questions.


QUESTION: Do they throw the $3 billion to the Metro Tunnel?
ANSWER: We will have more to say about our climate policy the closer we get to an election. Certainly, what we have already said is that we want to see 50 per cent of our energy mix by 2030 coming from renewables. I make no apologies for backing a new technology over the old technology, I make no apologies for saying that we should be much better at utilising solar power and wind power as part of our energy mix, there will be fossil fuels in our energy mix going forward and they will be part of our exports going forward. But Australia can't live in the past. We can't keep telling everyone that - what this Government's essentially trying to do is tell people that you don't have to change. But the Australian people want to see action on climate change.


QUESTION: Jason O'Mara, the head of the CFMMEU in Canberra has had his house shot at while he and his family was inside. What -
ANSWER: Well I did say that we'll have more to say about our energy policy going forward. And certainly, I think the Government's been in power for now the best part of six years. Did you know they're on their 12th energy policy? The Government needs to be upfront with the Australian people before the election. Are they going to invest in new coal fired power technology? Are they going to invest in new coal fired power plants?


QUESTION: Just quickly, will you be attending the Dick Pratt funding dinner?
ANSWER: Well first of all, whilst they're on the EBA, the EBA for the penalty rates is drawn from the award, so the award is still relevant. So our reversal of penalty rate cuts will lead to a pay rise for workers.


QUESTION: Dick Pratt -	ANSWER: Kyoto carry-over credits? No, my
answer hasn't changed from the last time.


QUESTION: We haven't even seen a business case for stage two Light Rail yet. Why are you giving this money now?
ANSWER: Well before the next election.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will you legislate to change the Fair Work Act to ensure that the minimum wage can be lifted?
ANSWER: Yes, I do - like you, I wish the Government would call the election.


QUESTION: Just further on Eryk’s question and a related question. You say that you want to get a Fair Work Commission guidance on how they come about the minimum wage. Does that require legislation, legislative change? And secondly, I want to ask about your bigger, better tax cuts that you talked about yesterday. You say that you're going to deliver that for eight, nine million people. Is that on top of everything that Labor's already promised or is it something that we're going to hear in your Budget Reply?
ANSWER: Listen, kids are allowed to have an opinion. In an ideal world, they would protest after school hours or on weekends.


QUESTION: You've already done that -
ANSWER: Oh yes, the foreign fighters.


QUESTION: I was asking about new tax offsets -
ANSWER: I feel for the kids. I don't have the same sympathy for the parents who've taken them into a war-zone to fight in a war zone, especially to fight on the ISIS side. Listen, I do feel for the kids and the extended family. We will work with the Government on this. But people who go overseas to fight in foreign wars, especially but not just limited to that ISIS cause, they get no sympathy from me. But I think the kids are in a different boat, that's really not easy is it?


QUESTION: Mr Shorten -
ANSWER: Well, we've got to work through. Do you separate kids from their parents? Who's going to look after them? I think the parents though shouldn't use the kids to rationalise. They've gone over there for whatever crazy reason. Now it hasn't worked out the way they thought. And then they want to come back? You don't just get that, you don't - you make your own bed, you've got to lie in it. But I do get that because they've got kids, those kids might have grandparents or aunts and uncles. It is complicated.  We will work with the Government. I don't think it's an issue of political point scoring between me and the Government.


QUESTION: Just further on the Fair Work Commission. Can you explain why you would trust the Fair Work Commission on minimum wage but not on penalty rates? And secondly, is there a link between the minimum wage and employment participation?
ANSWER: Listen, this Government has locked away money for a road project which isn't going to happen in the foreseeable future according to the Andrews Government. So I just think that's the ultimate in you know, sort of pettiness. If the Federal Government can't convince Daniel Andrews to do it, Daniel Andrews has been to an election and said he wasn't going to do it. Why don't the Federal Government climb down off their high horse and free up some infrastructure money for Victorians and Melburnians in the way which has been voted on at the state election. I think the Metro rail projects are fantastic. I'm pleased that we're doing an airport link - that's long overdue.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten -
ANSWER: Well, we'll talk with Dan Andrews about the best use of that.


QUESTION: The link between the minimum wage and employment if it gets too high, does that drive up unemployment?
ANSWER: Yeah listen, I've heard about that. I deplore any violence. Doesn't matter if it's an illegality, in the workplace, in the home or indeed, I deplore illegality in corporate suites and the banks. So I don't know any more about it. The police investigating.


QUESTION: Malcolm Turnbull says the Liberals have a problem with women and cultural issues as well. How much is he helping you right now?
ANSWER: The Democrat? Sorry.


QUESTION: Angus Taylor,  Angus Taylor has -
ANSWER: I go to heaps of fundraising, it is an occupational hazard of my job.


QUESTION: Thank you.
ANSWER: Thanks Alicia and good morning everybody. Fantastic to be out and about in Canberra proper with Chief Minister Andrew Barr and our exciting new candidate Alicia Payne. Federal Labor is pleased to announce that we will invest $200 million if elected, starting from our first budget, in Canberra's second stage Light Rail, which will see this marvellous tram line extended all the way to Woden. I'm not sure if people elsewhere in Australia realise but the Canberra region, the greater Canberra region, is home to half a million people. It's one of the fastest growing parts of Australia, and great cities have great public transport.


QUESTION: Scott Morrison has rejected calling the Chief Minister to include ACT Police under the new Integrity Commission. If you were elected would you commit to changing the Self Governing Act so that could happen or could you commit to having ACT Police come under your Federal ICAC?
ANSWER: Thanks Meegan, are there any questions on the Light Rail?


QUESTION: Angus Taylor has 66 firm power generation proposals on his desk for potential underwriting. What will the Shorten Government do with that list? Will you consider underwriting any of those projects and secondly do you accept that the Fair Work Act 2009 is the guidelines and the rulebook for the Fair Work Commission in determining the minimum wage and what you would hope would be a living wage.
ANSWER: Let's just - there's so many of you, it's great see you all, I've missed you. Perhaps if we start on my left and move around and we'll come back.


QUESTION: But the act says that increased workforce participation, the needs of the low paid, various economic considerations are all part of the decision but it does not place primacy on any of those factors. Will Labor ask or will Labor legislate to give primacy to the needs of the low paid?
ANSWER: Because we're committed to making sure that Canberra gets a fair share of our expenditure. Half a million people in the greater Canberra/Queanbeyan region. I think it is appropriate that we plan for the future. Of course there's got to be a business case, but I think that the work which has already been done, combined with the business case which will come, I think it's important we make sure we create room in our budgets in the future. People in the greater Canberra region and Queanbeyan, they pay their taxes. They've got a right to see some of the reinvested in their region. That's what we're doing.


QUESTION: What number would you put on a living wage?	ANSWER: Well first of all let's talk about one of the biggest problems in Australia and then I'll come to the specific
answer you’re seeking. Everything in Australia is going up except people's wages. We've seen, I read an article written by columnist Greg Jericho which showed in the journal he wrote in, that corporate profits since 2016 have gone up north to 40 per cent, but wages have gone up 8 per cent. In the last twelve months alone, when things are even going tough, corporate profits have gone up 9.8 per cent, but private sector wages haven't even hit two per cent.


QUESTION: Do you agree with the unions, 60 per cent?
ANSWER: Well on the first one, there's a range of ways which governments can put the case to the Fair Work Commission. They can make submissions in the minimum wage case -


QUESTION: So the Liberals have put a lot of obstacles between the light rail and the parliamentary approvals processes, <inaudible>, would you do anything to smooth the process through so a light rail stage two can happen?	ANSWER: You're right, I'm giving your
answer. First of all, you can make submissions and that's one thing which is definitely available a tool. Another tool or mechanism which is available is to change the legislation. We'll have more to say on this in coming weeks. I have to say though, please let me know how you go asking the current government about a wages policy.


QUESTION: With Labor's response to the Banking Royal Commission, why have you ruled out changes around mortgage brokers? And with the Disability Royal Commission, why do think it is taking so long to get terms of reference?
ANSWER: Hang on. Well we've got to see their Budget. Does anyone think this Budget is anything other than a propaganda document prepared at one minute to midnight by a government who is so busy killing each other that it's amazing they'll even turn up to the Budget?


QUESTION: The unions 60 per cent of the medium wage, they say that's what a living wage is. Do you agree with that?
ANSWER: - I'll come back to you -


QUESTION: On Light Rail, will your contribution be capped at $200 million or will it go up potentially resulting on what the business case says?
ANSWER: Well, first of all we trust the Fair Work Commission but periodically they do get it wrong, and Hawke and Keating said they got it wrong when they made a decision, about when they rejected award based superannuation in the late 80s, which led to Keating legislating compulsory super.


QUESTION: Just on emissions, Mr Shorten. Have you made a call yet on Kyoto carry-over credits which reduce your actual target from 45 to around 34?
ANSWER: Sorry, Speersy had a second question -


QUESTION: Hang on, hang on.
ANSWER: I love this argument put aside by the bosses of Australia, the fat cats, the top end of town. They say that if we pay the poorest workers in Australia a bit more, that's out of control. But how is it that these executives are happy to take more and more in corporate profits.  This is the problem of Australia in 2019. The benefits of hard work are not being equally spread. I want to say to all the Australians who are watching the news and watching this broadcast right now, I say I get it. I get that the cost of sending your kids to school has gone up. I get that your energy bills have gone up. I get that you haven't had any wages movement. I get that energy bills are up. But what I also get is that corporate profits are up. Is it fair in this country that corporate profits under the Liberals can go up north of 40 per cent and wages go up by 8 per cent? That's not the deal, everyone should share in the benefits of creating wealth in this country.


QUESTION: On the Liberals and Nationals struggling with renewables (inaudible) communities in regional Australia and do you (inaudible). Are you worried about Labor's position in terms of inner-city seats and regional Australia? And on Kyoto credits, would you guarantee to make your position clear before the election?
ANSWER: I think rather than shoot the messenger let's deal with the message. Everybody knows the Liberal Party has a problem with women. We've seen it, and Malcolm Turnbull's just belled the cat yet again.


QUESTION: (inaudible) Because this question from David Speers is critical. If you do accept carbon credit carry-over, then your target goes from 45 to 34. Nations including New Zealand, Germany, Iceland, others say that they aren't going to use the carry-over. Wouldn't you be wimping it if you didn’t accept - if you did accept the carry-over?
ANSWER: I promise you I'm going to come back to you -


QUESTION: (inaudible)
ANSWER: Well, first of all, there are mechanisms to supervise any allegations of corruption within police and law enforcement in Australia but I would start off by picking up the phone and talking to Andrew Barr.


QUESTION: This has been your target for some years now.
ANSWER: Well, let's just deal with Angus Taylor, I think he said in that famous interview on Insiders a couple of Sundays ago they had 66 offers and he didn't deny that ten of them to do with coal. I don't know what's on his list so asking me to agree with what's on his list without me seeing the list, I'm not going to do that. But I think the heart of your question goes to, would the Morrison Government invest in new coal fired power stations? I can be very clear because I have been for years: no taxpayer money for new coal fired power stations.


QUESTION: Will you apply that 45 per cent to the transport sector and the agricultural sector?
ANSWER: Ben, what I will do is when we announce our policy, we'll make sure we give you all a heads up to be at the conference. What I am flagging to you, because Labor actually believes in having a wages policy, is the status quo is unsatisfactory. And don't take my word that the status quo on wages is unsatisfactory, go and ask most Australians who go to work.


QUESTION: But how do you get, how do you get to 45 per cent -
ANSWER: I think it's a bit early for us to do that. What I can do - because I'm not the Fair Work Commission - what I can do though is simply say this, $18.93 for an adult working full time is not enough -


QUESTION: - 45 per cent across the board?
ANSWER: Sorry, I said I would go to - I said I'd come to you next.


QUESTION: What is your policy though?
ANSWER: I don't know why the Liberals hate public transport around Australia. I think that's one of the great mysteries. It's up there with what does Stuart Robert upload and download on the Internet for $40,000? And it's probably up there - it's not quite up there with why did they get rid of Malcolm Turnbull? But it's one of those mysteries, isn't it? We will work creatively with the ACT Government.


QUESTION: It’s a press conference Mr Shorten.
ANSWER: Well on mortgage brokers, we've suggested that the system needs to change but let's face it, mortgage brokers were not at the top of the hit list when the Banking Royal Commission was called for. We see that the bigger banks and the financial institutions as being the bigger priority. We accept after talking to mortgage brokers, that there is a gap in the market which they fill but we've also made it clear that we want the fees to be identified up front.


QUESTION: $200 million on something that the first stage, we don't even know if it is viable? We don't even know whether it's a dud or not?	ANSWER: Well unions are entitled to ask what they want - and that's what unions do, try and get better conditions for workers. I haven't formed a view on the
answer to that question.


QUESTION: There’s division in the Nationals around coal, do you think energy could be factor in yet another leadership crisis?
ANSWER: At this point, we've budgeted for $200 million. I mean, hats off - I was speaking to the Chief Minister - and he can talk a bit about some of the upside of this project - but this government did a fixed contract which meant that they kept the costs under control. So I think, perhaps unlike his colleague in New South Wales, the embattled Premier there - if you want to see Light Rail done properly, maybe Gladys should have come down and spoken to Andrew.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Paris agreement is economy wide, not just the electricity sector. Are you signalling here that your 45 per cent may not be economy wide?	ANSWER: I got asked this yesterday, my
answer hasn't changed from yesterday. We're still looking at that question. We will have more to say on climate.


QUESTION: Do you want a small increment Mr Shorten?
ANSWER: Sorry. No, hang on. Sorry, Andrew, I'm going to go here.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten an issue that some Queensland MPs are talking a lot about is coal-fired generation. Barnaby Joyce says the Liberals and Nationals aren't married on this issue, should the public be concerned about the split there?
ANSWER: First of all, in terms of, you talk about regional seats and city seats - when I look at electorate, I just see Australians. I see Australians dealing with actually far more issues in common than I think a lot of the superficial analysis gives. Australians want to make sure that they have good jobs. Good jobs though which have job security, which pay well. They also want a government who's stable and united. They want to see a government who's going to tackle energy prices and get them down rather than going up and up and up. Australians are concerned that $2.8 billion has been cut from our hospitals, $360 million from preventative health programs, nearly $2 billion from aged care and of course, the patient rebate freeze has cost Australians and GPs, the frontline of our medical service, $3 billion. Australians are concerned that this is a government who cannot agree on climate change policy and they are fundamentally perturbed that everything's going up in Australia except their wages. So I don't accept that there are massive distinctions around Australia and that somehow this is an election of very different Australias. A lot of us have got a lot in common and if I'm Prime Minister and Labor and my united stable team is elected, we're going to work on what we agree on, we're going to bring people together. There's too much us and them in Australian life.


QUESTION: When should the public find out whether the Government would invest in new coal-fired generation, do you think it should be before the election that the public should know that?
ANSWER: Well I know that the government's relying on it, so I'm sure you've accused them of wimping it. For us, we're having a look at the mechanism. We'll have more to say close to the election.


QUESTION: (inaudible) phase out coal fired power station under your plan to increase emissions targets?
ANSWER: Hang on - No, I haven't, Andrew but what I'm doing is actually going to what Australians raise with me every day.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten the Budget is coming up, they're talking about the government may well need something to really get their selves going - (inaudible) change in the polling, change in the opinions after the Budget?	ANSWER: I don't want to interrupt your questions at all with an
answer but I just will finish the point on Andrew. You're making a point, we're saying, and I've said politely a number of times, I'll continue to say politely, we will announce our climate policy before the election. But the election hasn't actually been called yet.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten there seems to be some confusion about whether Labor will count the Kyoto credits towards your emissions reduction targets (inaudible).
ANSWER: We will announce all of that as we finalise our policy.


QUESTION: When will you announce your policy on that?
ANSWER: Guys, our climate change policies will be for the -


QUESTION: So what is the cheapest source of power; coal or renewables?
ANSWER: Packy, I know you guys want me to do the whole campaign launch today. I'm not going -


QUESTION: When you're Prime Minister, will you stop the building of any more - any more coal fired power stations?
ANSWER: Packy, I've said we're going to announce it before the election.


QUESTION: Will there be (inaudible)?	ANSWER: It's a reasonable question and I've given a reasonable
answer.


QUESTION: There is a proposal to scrap the election eve ban on TV campaign advertising. Do you think the ban is outdated?
ANSWER: Guys, can I tell you about the cities in the world who had trams and ripped them up? They want them back. Go and talk to someone in Brisbane when they ripped up the trams in 1969. Talk to the people in Sydney - and now, they're getting Light Rail and they're coming across, would you believe it, some of the buried track when they used to have trams, No town, no city ever goes backwards having light rail and tram. I'm a Melburnian, we've had them for 130, 140 years and we wouldn't give up our trams for all the tea in China.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, just to ask you about the latest polls. Are you ready to be Prime Minister?
ANSWER: You've got to admit, it is one of the mysteries of Australian politics - it's like the Bermuda Triangle of Australian politics, conservatives and energy policy. Why do they find it so hard to acknowledge that renewable energy is a good thing and it's going to expand, that it's a cheaper technology, it's getting better? Why do they find it so hard to acknowledge that two million Australian households have renewable energy?


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, how is your offer any different to what's already been put up?
ANSWER: No, I'm not signalling anything over than - Sorry, Packy, I've got to say that every time someone's asked the question - Sorry, every time I've been asked, you've come in before I get my first word out.


QUESTION: Just specific though, you mentioned there, you just said there that you're matching what's already been offered. But you said they've done 'zip'? So if you're saying you are matching how does that work?
ANSWER: Okay guys.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten have you perhaps missed a chance to trump the LNP and pledge (inaudible)?
ANSWER: Thanks Des. Hello everybody, it's great to be here on a Monday, Labour Day in Melbourne and me visiting Yatala. It's a fantastic brewery I really am very impressed by the management of the workforce I've met here and along with Des Hardman and Senator Murray Watt on a very clear message to the workforce of the Yatala brewery and beyond that to workers in Queensland and right through Australia.


QUESTION: (inaudible) in the Queensland Government to put up their share?
ANSWER: Well if you're earning $90,000 a year here it'll be about $928 each year. So you might have - let's take a family here who might be someone works here on the production line, skilled operators. This is a long standing workforce too so they're very good at their job. They might have a spouse who works at the local hospital who might be $60,000 - $70,000 a year, under Labor in our first three years you'll be getting a tax refund of somewhere approaching $6,000.


QUESTION: Bill, there are some pretty big plans for the light rail future extensions. Would a Labor Government's support further extensions to say, the airport, the Spit, that kind of thing?
ANSWER: Listen I don't really want to talk about the Coalition but I think it's fair to say, this is probably the most divided government in recent generations. I mean, the Liberals are divided, they can't agree on who the leader should have been. They can't agree on whether or not to give women a fair go, they can't even agree on energy or climate policy.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the state Liberal Government seems underwhelmed by your generosity put for South Road, saying well A, it's not ready to get yet, it's not shovel ready so the money would essentially have to be put in a holding account, and B, you're too late to the table anyway.
ANSWER: The government just doesn't have one line on coal. Now, coal is important. It is part of our export mix going forward, very important part of our export mix. We're still going to use fossil fuels as part of our energy, but coal has become a very divisive issue in the government with the Queensland conservatives not agreeing with the Victorian conservatives. We saw the train-wreck interview of their latest Minister, Minister Reynolds. This government, because they don't like renewables gets obsessed about coal to the cost of everything else. For me it is about lower energy prices, for me it's about not handing on a worse deal to our kids and taking real action on climate change. This is a divided government - I think this is probably the most divided government in many generations.


QUESTION: Just on Sturt -
ANSWER: No, what'll happen is I saw the government today doing what they do best, lying about Labor's position. Coal is going to be part of our energy mix going forward, but we are not going to put all of our eggs in the coal basket. The reality is that climate change is real. We have experienced one of the hottest summers and in many cases the hottest summer on record. Australians are also experiencing massive spikes in increase in energy prices. Households and businesses are sick and tired of a government in Canberra who can't agree on what to do about energy prices and climate change, but the problem is that the dysfunctional division, chaos and instability of their government is costing Australians in their hip pocket. Because the longer it takes for the government to work out one position on energy, what that means is there is no new investment in energy generation, which means that we are asking to do more with less energy which pushes prices up. This government can't be trusted on energy and they can't be trusted on climate change. They've had six years or the best part of six years -  to give this government another three years to hope that they will do in the next three years what they haven't done in the last six years is the triumph of hope over experience.


QUESTION: What's the point though in locking up money in a project the State Government says is not ready to go yet, when you could put money toward other projects in Adelaide?
ANSWER: Listen, I think that the government is going to try and issue a propaganda document called the Budget. I think they are going to try and chase votes. Really, I think the question you have got to ask yourselves is: What is it they are going to do on April 2nd that they haven't done in the previous six years? I mean, we are on our third Prime Minister under this crew. You have got the national party, a divided (inaudible) and you have got their 12th energy policy, they've had  22 reshuffles. This is a government, who the Australian people have generously given them a second chance in 2016. Unfortunately, the government hasn't lived up to the promises. In fact, they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull and never explained why.


QUESTION: Is this a bad sign you know, if you were to become Prime Minister you have to deal with a State Liberal Government that doesn't want to play ball. Are you worried about how that relationship will go?
ANSWER: Well, I've said that we are taking that under advice about how much we should do that, so we are still looking at that question.


QUESTION: Surely you're viewing Sturt - or Labor winning Sturt as you know, it would be a bonus and almost your entire resources are going to go into Boothby. Is it fair to assume?
ANSWER: Before the election, but of course you know I love this - the government has had 12 energy policies. There is no point in asking a government energy policy out on a date because it will be different by the time the date arrives. This is a government who cannot agree on energy. They are at war with themselves and it would almost be a circus, except it is actually costing Australian businesses and costing Australian families. Everyone knows that it has become an unpleasant adventure to open an energy bill from a company these days because you know it's going up and up. The price of gas has gone up and up, the price of electricity gone up, up and up.


QUESTION: Nominations for the Liberal Party preselection in Sturt close today. There have been a number of moderates in that party talking about wanting a woman to run for Sturt. Are we in a situation where the moderates are saying - the Liberal Party is saying we want a woman but we won't vote for one?
ANSWER: There's no doubt renewable energy is becoming the cheapest. But in Labor's policy, we will have some coal, we'll have some gas and of course, we will also have a lot more renewable energy. It's a mix and that's what we've got to do. But just pretending that we can do business as usual, pretending that they're going to build a whole paddock full of new coal fired power stations which are very expensive -  it's just ridiculous. It's not actually offering a plan for the future, it's offering a photo of the past.


QUESTION: Mr Turnbull may have been speaking the truth though, it might be dead right that the right in the Party fear that he could sneak over the line in the next election and with the greatest respect be stuck with him for three years.
ANSWER: I think the market is going to deal with the questions which you are asking me about. What I want to do is I want Australia to go back to being an energy superpower. I'm sick and tired of watching our gas be exported overseas, purchased more cheaply overseas than Australian business can have it. Coal will still be in our mix. What I'm not going to do is tell people that you don't need to change.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten just on talking about former Prime Ministers, what do you make of Tony Abbott's backflip this morning about withdrawing from the Paris Agreement?
ANSWER: There's no doubt that we need to have more developed policies on climate change, and we'll announce more of our climate policies closer to the election. But the idea that we can go business as usual and think that you don't have to try to get the emissions down is just ridiculous. I think the Government needs to come clean today; are they going to build more coal fired power stations or are they not? Or are they just going to keep talking about it and having an ongoing argument for the next nine weeks?


QUESTION: The government says that your figures on the North-South corridor are a little bit off and it'll cost about $5 billion. What do you say to that, do you have the figures right?
ANSWER: No, I think that if we have a long election, it doesn't hurt to give people 48 hours break before they go to the polls, on the electronic advertising.


QUESTION: Will that leave the job half done?
ANSWER: I'm ready to be Prime Minister but in terms of the polls, I've had a basic rule for the last five and a half years: whether or not they're good, bad or indifferent, I don't talk about them. More importantly than that basic rule, I understand that there are more important things to talk about than opinion polls. What the Australian people want to hear me and other politicians talk about is the people. And I think one of their number one issues they want to hear us talk about is the plan we have to deal with the fact that everything is going up except your wages. Well today, I was able to tell brewery workers in the Yatala, I can tell farmers in the bush, I can tell small businesses in Western Sydney - we have got a plan to give you a better, fairer tax cuts. We have got a plan to tackle energy prices. We've got a plan to restore funding to our hospitals, our Medicare and our schools and we've got a plan to help get wages moving again. That's our plan and we look forward to talking to it between now, every day now until the next election.


QUESTION: But what does that costing look like, is it a widening, bridges, tunnels, what exactly?
ANSWER: Hello everyone, thanks Murray for that introduction. Great to be here with our candidates because we are going to show that Labor intends to make the Gold Coast marginal for the Government. We are here to win every vote we can, and one of the things we're offering people on the Gold Coast is better public transport and more jobs. So I'm pleased today as part of our commitment, to jobs, to local tourism, to decongesting the traffic, and of course to making sure that we have more public transport, Labor if elected will commit $112 million to stage 3A, which will see the light rail, the trams be extended from Broadbeach all the way down to Burleigh Heads. This is 7km of track, it's 2,400 jobs. It's going to connect also the light rail and the trams up with the heavy rail here - it's just great news. The Gold Coast is one of the most go ahead areas in Australia, but the area has grown, but the politicians in Canberra haven't always kept up with the growth in the area. Well I'm here to fix that problem. Labor is committed to $112 million which will see the light rail extended another 7kms, all the way to Burleigh Heads and we will create 2,400 jobs in the process. Good for tourism, good for public transport, good for the locals, and of course good for the environment - trams are very environmentally friendly.


QUESTION: The state is talking about one option being tunnelled, the whole thing at once, in one gigantic project rather than breaking it into bits, and it has been held back.
ANSWER: Well we're matching what the Government's said, but I would also point out to you that we've got the runs on the board. From 2009 as Murray said through the stadium, through to our commitments. The Gold Coast has been taken for granted by the LNP. You've got the retiring Minister Ciobo, you've got the Member for McPherson, and of course you've got Minister Stuart Roberts the famous uploader and downloader using $40,000 of taxpayer money for you know, we've never found out what.


QUESTION: You mentioned local procurement being a goal for this project, do you have a minimum percentage of locals working on it?
ANSWER: What I am doing is giving you a history lesson in who has got the ball rolling here. The reality is that the only reason that we're standing here at a light rail facility is because Labor in 2009 pushed it. I mean it's how politics works on the Gold Coast. The LNP collect the votes and don't do the work, we're turning up and saying give us a chance, we will do the work.


QUESTION: But Penny Wong, you want a minimum percentage on the subs project, shouldn't that apply here as well?
ANSWER: I think the LNP have been missing in action for the last six years. Ask yourselves, what has this government done to help provide tax relief for working citizens of the Gold Coast? What has this LNP Government in Canberra done to restore people's penalty rates? Energy prices are going up and up and up, they've frozen the Medicare patient refund so people are paying more out of pocket costs. Did you know on the Gold Coast on average it's about 25 per cent more out of pocket payment to see a GP, 40 per cent across Australia as well, to see a specialist. This is a government who doesn't know that cost of living is a giant issue on the Gold Coast, but what we're doing here is we're providing a rail option or tram options for people. We're also going to provide more jobs hopefully, but we've also got a plan to get wages moving and to tackle cost of living. You know, I think what the LNP needs on the Gold Coast is a big giant wake up call. They're either running out the door like Steve Ciobo, or they're missing in action like some of the other members of parliament.  Labor's here because we're hungry for the votes of people on the Gold Coast and we're going to demonstrate it by doing the things that people on the Gold Coast need, rather than fighting amongst ourselves.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can I just ask Labor's announcement this week to tie hospital funding to the provision of abortion services, was that discussed or signed off by your leadership group?
ANSWER: Listen, Annastacia Palaszczuk is so much more pro-Queensland than the current Prime Minister in Canberra ever will be. I haven't come here to give a lecture to the Queensland Government, I've come here to say that a Federal Labor Government in Canberra, with our great candidates, we will stop treating the Gold Coast as the forgotten zone of Australian politics. It is a fact, and you all know it and people know it, that because these seats have traditionally, in particular Moncrieff, McPherson and Fadden, voted loyally for the LNP.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, once upon a time being Opposition Leader in this country was considered one of the hardest jobs.
ANSWER: Well obviously, once we've done stage 3A then Stage 3B comes on the table. The ideal path would be to see a connection all the way from here right down to the airport. But you know let's do the next stage. Stage 3A is the next step. But I'm a Victorian, which means that you know, we've been to the Gold Coast and a lot of Victorians moved up here, which is a good thing on balance, I suggest. But we get it. We get the Gold Coast in a way which I'm not sure that the Government in Canberra do. I want to see more public transport, I want to see more jobs, I want to see wages moving, I want to see real action on cost of living, better hospitals, better schools. I think we've got to catch a tram soon, they don't just wait for us.


QUESTION: Right now in the political climate, is this one of the easiest?
ANSWER: Thanks well Happy International Women's Day everybody, and it's great to be here doing this announcement with many members of our South Australian team, including our fabulous new candidate running in the seat of Sturt, Cressida O'Hanlon, and I'll say more about her in a moment. And I'd like to congratulate in particular Nadia Clancy, our candidate in Boothby who's been most diligent in advocating for what I'm about to say.


QUESTION: Just briefly on climate change -
ANSWER: Could they make up their mind what the criticism is? Are we too late or too early? Now listen, I understand that Premier Marshall's got himself into hot water by being a bit of a butler to the Federal Liberal Government with the very poor position they've taken on water from the Murray-Darling. But what I just say to Premier Marshall is we understand you've got to say your political things, but don't worry, if you want to get things done, we're just the ticket for South Australia. We understand the business case needs to be fully completed but you don't need to be a Rhodes Scholar to work out that this is the number one commuting infrastructure challenge for motorists in Adelaide. We've got the money, because we've made the difficult reform decisions. So we're ready. I hope the South Australian Government doesn't drag its feet coming the party on this, but we'll work with them. So I understand that he feels, you know, he's got to send up a little flare sign to help signal that he still sort of, likes the Liberals in Canberra, but I think he's like most South Australians, he knows the sooner we can get a Labor Government in Canberra, that means more jobs for South Australia.


QUESTION: Just very quickly. Sarah Hanson-Young is going to be out this afternoon, she's going to say that if Labor is serious about climate change they would come out and say that exploration in the Bight should be banned. What would you say to that?
ANSWER: He was next, and then I’m happy to come to you.


QUESTION: I just wanted to ask Cressida, do you -
ANSWER: First of all, it's not the only project we're going to do in South Australia. But secondly, what's the point of a South Australian Liberal government not getting on with a major infrastructure challenge. The good news here is you don’t have to take my word for it being important, why don't you do a quick poll of all the motorists this week, the problem is there now. I'm not going to be one of those sort of politicians who go State/Federal arguing over everything. But I'd just say to the South Australian State Government if you're not ready to deal with a major infrastructure challenge, then maybe you need to look in the mirror as to what the problem is. We'll work with them - no matter who's in power in South Australia, we'll work with them. But again we're doing what the people are asking for. That's as simple as that.


QUESTION: Oh sorry.
ANSWER: All I'm worried about is that motorists don't get stuck in traffic jams. All I'm worried about is the cost to motorists, the loss of productivity, the loss of potential jobs for South Australia. This is a good project and I just say the Premier Marshall - don't fall for the old politics of the current mob in Canberra, where whenever Labor has a good idea they just feel the need to get a stick out and scare people. This is a good idea. I just speak to the viewers at home tonight and the readers of South Australian media tomorrow morning - would you like to see improvements to the South Road? Would you like to see the next stage of the works be completed? If you would, vote Labor in the next election.


QUESTION: Do you think you can win Sturt or (inaudible)?
ANSWER: No, we don't take any seat for granted, that's why it doesn't matter if it's Adelaide, or Hindmarsh, or Kingston, or Wakefield, or Macon, or Boothby or indeed Sturt. We want as many people as possible to vote for us all over South Australia and Australia. Boothby is a very hard ask, Labor hasn't traditionally been successful even though we've tried very hard in the past. But I think we've got all of the elements favouring us to be very competitive. First of all we've got a great candidate, very hard working. Secondly, unlike the Liberals in Canberra we know where South Australia is. We want the Murray to flow for example. We're not just a party of the northern irrigators, we're a party for South Australians.


QUESTION: Do you think your chances in Sturt are enhanced if they stand a man, if the Liberals preselect a man?
ANSWER: I'm going to get Penny to talk more about what's happening in South Australia, I can't - I'm not going to be a commentator on the Liberal Party's civil war. Who they pick - it doesn't fuss us who they pick, because we've already got a better candidate. But I do think that today we've seen major fault lines emerge yet again in the Morrison Government. You've got the former Prime Minister Turnbull going on television overnight, basically complaining that he still doesn't know why they got rid of him.  You know, this latest outbreak of division highlights that the Liberal Party still essentially hate each other and can't stop talking about themselves.


QUESTION: It's looking in all likelihood that James Stephens given the moderates controlling that branch, that he'll stand. Do you feel as are your chances to win are enhanced by coming up against a man?
ANSWER: Well, as I said in another context about Julie Bishop last week, we'll never know. We'll never know if Malcolm Turnbull could have won the last election. He still doesn't know why he is not the Prime Minister now. It is a very unsatisfactory state of affairs at the heart of this government, that they just won't explain why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull. I mean, I think the message to the people of Australia from Mr Turnbull's contribution overnight, is that the Liberal Party still hate each other as much as ever.


QUESTION: In terms of climate change, that's obviously a big national issue, I mean what are the people in the eastern suburbs saying about climate change?
ANSWER: I think Penny sort of telepathically read your mind about that question. Does anyone seriously believe that Tony Abbott believes in climate change? He's under pressure in his own seat so now all of a sudden he's a born again lefty on climate change - spare me. I noticed that Mr Turnbull is tweeting against Mr Abbott today. Mr Abbott said this morning apparently that he's changed his mind, he's had another conversion, he's had plenty of conversions in different directions on this issue, and then Mr Turnbull's tweeted his criticism of Mr Abbott's point of view. The Liberal Party, they just can't get their act together. If you want to see real action on climate change then you vote Labor. If you want to get lower energy prices because of greater investment in renewable energy, then you just vote Labor. If Tony Abbott says he believes in climate change you know I've got a - it's rubbish.


QUESTION: And just to confirm you live within the electorate as well?
ANSWER: Yes we have. There's been previous investment. We understand that more work will have to be done even beyond what we're proposing. But right now today, I just want to speak to all the commuters who use that road. We have got a costed proposition with money set aside in the budget to pay to upgrade this road.  At the end of the day voters are entitled to say when they look at both political parties, what's in it for us, what's in it for the people, why should we vote for you. We have got the ability in the budget and we're making our pledge well before an election. We're saying we're putting aside $1.2 billion, we want to get going. We want to make sure that we can help ease the congestion on the most important north-south arterial in Adelaide. This is long overdue, we're prepared to do it.


QUESTION: Mr Shorten, very last question on Malcolm Turnbull, well two actually.
ANSWER: Well each road always has upgraded stages. When the road was first done, then you needed to do the next stage and then the next stage. We will absolutely work with the State Government. Of course we want to see their business case and their propositions, but what I'm doing is I want to be a leader for all Australia and that includes South Australia. I don't think South Australia has had its fair share of road and public transport investment in the last six years. What I'm saying here today, because of the advocacy of Nadia Clancy, Labor's candidate in Boothby, because of the work of the South Australian Labor team led by Senator Penny Wong, we are in a position to make a costed promise to be able to deliver  $1.2 billion which is absolutely going to mean that people won't get stuck in the sort of traffic jams that they're seeing right now.


QUESTION: Do you think he would have beaten you?
ANSWER: It will be a range - well the issue of tunnels still has to be worked on. We're waiting to see what the view of the State Government is on that. We've said that our first priority and we're suggesting this to the South Australian Government, should be from the Glenelg Tram Overpass to Tonsley, we think that's an important part of which should be prioritised early on.


QUESTION: And I've still got the second question. Given his supposed I guess, disloyalty you might say, towards the party overnight, he might be angling for a diplomatic post under a Shorten Government. Would you consider that?
ANSWER: Well first of all, the South Australian Government's welcome to put up its bids, but what I think about when I talk about this project is the people who are in the traffic this week. You know, you can have whatever pie in the sky that the government, the Liberals may be talking about, we want to get on and do it. We've got a whole raft of road proposals all around Australia and not only in the cities in regional Australia. We're also committed to improving public transport options. We're here saying that we respect Adelaide. People talk in South Australia, are they losing political influence in Canberra? You might be under the Liberals with the departure of senior Liberal Christopher Pyne, but with Penny Wong being in the leadership of the Labor Party and Don Farrell, her deputy in the leadership of the Labor Party. When it comes to decisions in Canberra, South Australian Labor punches above its weight. And I'm here today to say that the election may or may not be decided by seats in South Australia, but that isn't what influences us. We want to make sure that people have got proper ways of getting to work, more efficient, more effective and more importantly getting home from work.


QUESTION: On the living wage, the ACTU has previously said they’d like to see 60 per cent of the national median wage, so the living wage is pegged to that - is that something you would like to see or have you got a different policy?
ANSWER: Listen on our procurement policy, we haven't put a percentage number, but what we're going to ask is for participation plans from people who've bid for Commonwealth contracts. And what we want these participation plans to do, is to demonstrate what is the local content. We have put a number on our apprentices. What we say is if you've got a project which is attracting Commonwealth taxpayer support, we want to see one in 10 of the people employed being apprentices.


QUESTION: Will you announce a wages policy before the election. If so, when?
ANSWER: Without going into all our processes this decision is supported by our party full stop, absolutely. And let's just talk about this issue very briefly, I mean it's been covered off. I think that women have, and it's a very - I'm going to make this point because it's International Women's Day. Women have the right to control their own health decisions, and that's what we're doing, we're reflecting that. They shouldn't have to pay thousands of dollars, run the gauntlet in some of the private clinics to some of the abuse they receive. We're not going to make religious institutions or faithful - particular people of faith carry out procedures that are contrary to their faith. But women in Australia have the right to control their own health decisions.


QUESTION: On Christmas Island, have you been briefed on how it's going to work on the Medevac -
ANSWER: It still is.


QUESTION: You're making the call that $18.60 isn't enough, but then you won't say what is enough to make a living.
ANSWER: No I mean, I am very lucky that I have such a great team behind me and I've got a very talented frontbench, I've got a very talented backbench. And I'm grateful to the contribution that South Australian Labor makes by providing me such outstanding Members of Parliament and candidates. So that always improves the you know, the ability to do the job. Also, I just should acknowledge that it's been about 2000 days, not quite but just a few days short that I've been Leader of the Opposition. That makes me other than John Howard, the longest serving leader of a political party in the 21st century. But that stability is through the unity of the whole of the Labor Party, and the union movement, and I appreciate their support. So I've got the talented people, I've got a united team and we've been doing the policy work. But what makes me particularly privileged to do this job is within about eight or ten weeks I'll be able to present Labor's plan to all Australians.


QUESTION: On energy policy, six Nationals MPs are demanding action from Michael McCormack to put the government's energy policy back on the agenda. What do you make of this in-fighting?
ANSWER: Sorry - so just on climate change?


QUESTION: If there's a vote on this issue in Budget week, what are the changes you would like to see?
ANSWER: I don't mind Sarah chasing a headline. But what I do think is that we'll be guided by - and what I know is that we're always guided by the science. We're guided by the science. You know, we're not a develop at all costs party, but we're not a party who's going to just react to a headline. We want - the science and evidence is what's going to guide us. And I understand the debate about the Bight. I think at the moment, the even more pressing issue is the future of the Murray-Darling Basin. And I would just encourage people who are concerned about the environment of Australia, by all means make sure that we’re - I mean, Labor created more marine parks than any other government in the history of Federation. And I say to people, if you want to protect the environment vote for a party who can form a government not a party of protest like the Greens.


QUESTION: Can Labor unseat Ministers like Greg Hunt and Josh Frydenberg?
ANSWER: She's over here.


QUESTION: Do you think there could be a repeat of the state results federally here in Victoria?.
ANSWER: So many women!


QUESTION: The Greens are threatening to launch the biggest protests Australia's ever seen if the Morrison Government signs off on two new coal-fired power plants in New South Wales. What do you make of the plan?
ANSWER: You saw it from your farming time.


QUESTION: Why have you decided today to come to a State Government funded project to announce what you want to do as Prime Minister, if you were elected?
ANSWER: Sure.


QUESTION: How is Labor going to address the concerns of Chinese Australians after Michael Daley's remarks in the New South Wales election campaign?
ANSWER: Listen, Julie Bishop said that too, but we'll never know because in the case of Julie Bishop the blokes didn't want to give the loyal woman deputy a crack after she loyally served four Liberal leaders. We'll never know if Malcolm Turnbull could have won the next election. We still don't even know why they got rid of Malcolm Turnbull. The one thing we do know, today's intervention from Malcolm Turnbull sends a very clear message to the Australian people - that Liberal Party, they still hate each other and they're not getting better.


QUESTION: Hi Bill, how are you going?
ANSWER: Listen, the Liberal Party said to Australians three years ago, vote Liberal because Malcolm Turnbull was our leader. Now the Liberal Party say they don't even like Malcolm Turnbull. How can you trust anything the Liberal Party says in an election when last time they said vote for Malcolm Turnbull and then they got rid of him. So you know, I think if some of the Liberals want to attack Mr Turnbull, I think the first thing they need to do is explain why they got rid of him.


QUESTION: Before we get into the detail of it, if I could start a bit generally on the economy. I think we’ve seen in the last few days competing economic narratives. Both yourself and the Prime Minister coming at it from different angles. I had a conversation about a year ago with Kevin Rudd, your predecessor times two, and he said one of the difficulties a Labor Opposition always faces close to an election is a reluctance amongst voters to hand the economy to Labor, especially a recovering one or a strong one. He encountered that problem in 2007, and he said that's why he had to make those answers about being an economic conservative and so forth. He said it's always - the polls would always close on you just because of that inherent reluctance. How do you, mindful of what you've just told us, how do you sort of combat that sentiment? We heard yesterday the Prime Minister waving the recession word around, leaving that hanging, obviously trying to reinforce that negative perception. How do you get around that?
ANSWER: Thanks Ged and I acknowledge the great work of the Level Crossing Removal Authority and all the people working to make Melbourne a much more liveable city. I'm here today though to talk about what is one of Australia's biggest problems. The problem is that everything's going up except people's wages. Wherever I travel in Australia people say that the cost of living is going up, the energy bills are going up, the patient rebate for Medicare has been frozen for years, the out-of-pocket costs of going to see a doctor or a specialist is going up and up, private health insurance is becoming a luxury item. So on one hand everything's going up, but on the other hand wages are stagnating.


QUESTION: I was going to ask you about it, because the Prime Minister made the point yesterday, his line is you have to grow the economy to pay for all these things, health and so forth, all the issues that you hold dear. What's your basic plan for growing the economy? Is it this inclusive growth strategy that Labor has or something a bit more basic?
ANSWER: Well my policy on the minimum wage is that it should be a living wage. I start from a core principle, and I defy the government to disagree with me on this principle. No Australian adult should have a full-time job where their wage is not enough to keep them out of poverty. We should have a minimum wage which is a living wage. The cost of living has been going up. The reality is that for young people it's harder than it's ever been to be able to buy their first home. The reality is that energy prices are out of control because we've got a government who can't control energy prices because they hate renewable energy. We've got a government who's made such massive cuts to our health care system that for Australians, middle and working class Australians out- of- pocket costs for health care are just too expensive. In terms of the process to resolve a living wage, that should be done by the independent umpire the Fair Work Commission. But we need to have very clear guidelines which state that a minimum wage for an adult working full time should be sufficient to lift them out of poverty not keep them in poverty.


QUESTION: Could I ask you about that - on wages, because there was a bit of interest in this room. One of the criticisms of business is the money has to come from somewhere. You talked about the minimum wage being inadequate, not a living wage. Is a living wage still on the table as part of Labor policy and also you didn't mention in terms of things you would do, the reintroduction of industry wide bargaining in low paid sectors which came up in Labor's National Conference last year. Are those two ideas still potential Labor policy position?
ANSWER: We've announced a wages policy, we've been unveiling parts of it for the last 18 months. This government doesn't have a wages policy, I mean - sorry, let me rephrase that. if you're the Chairman of the ABC or the CEO of the ABC, they'll give you $1.5 million to go away, But for the rest of Australia, they don't have a wages policy.


QUESTION: So we could be looking at a living wage?
ANSWER: The government - listen, we all know the government's making it up on the run. When it comes to keeping strong borders, Labor will keep strong borders and we'll have regional processing. But it is beyond a joke, that the Prime Minister of Australia flies to the furtherest part of what is technically Australia, to run a scare campaign. Do you know that photo opportunity which the Prime Minister took Australia on yesterday, cost $2000 a minute. I'm here today talking to workers in Australia, saying that I don't think that $18 per hour is enough for a full-time, job for an adult to be able to get by on. I'm focused on the workers, I'm focused on small business and subcontractors, I'm focused on tackling cost of living and getting things moving, this Prime Minister's focused on photo opportunities at $2000 a minute.


QUESTION: Okay, we've only got a minute to go, so I'll take that as it’s on the table.
ANSWER: What I've done is I've explained to you the process. Wages should be in the first instance set by the independent umpire, the Fair Work Commission. I have made it very clear and I'm happy to repeat it because it's a very important concept, that we need a minimum wage, which means that for an adult working full time they're not stuck in poverty. We used to think that stuff happened in America, the idea that you had to have three jobs, that you couldn't - you had to rely on tips, that you wouldn't get health insurance. You know, we used to think that was what happened in America. But the reality is for more and more Australians they’re in part time work, they're trapped in labour hire arrangements, and they're not getting paid properly and what we're seeing now is something which I never thought I'd see in my lifetime; Australian adults working full time, in some cases holding down two or three jobs and they're still barely coasting around the poverty range. That's not the Australia we want our kids to grow up in. This government is chronically incapable of a wages policy. They just say leave it to the market, they don't understand that there's something wrong when corporate profits are up 10 per cent and wages are only up two per cent. This government has no plan. Even when it comes to taxes, Labor has got better, bigger tax refunds for workers up to $120,000 in Australia which is about 10 million people. We're proposing that for a family you know, a married couple perhaps mum working in aged care earning $60,000, dad might be working as a construction labourer earning $90,000 a year, under Labor's Fair a better tax plan this couple will get nearly $2000 back in tax refund every year. But this Federal Government, no plan for wages, no plan for energy prices, no plan for health costs and no plan for better, fairer and bigger tax cuts for Australian workers.


QUESTION: No that's okay. Just very quickly, two things of interest to our audience. You've outlined your carbon emissions policy for the energy sector, you’ve flagged a baseline and credit scheme for heavy manufacturing (inaudible) will we see the details of that before the election?
ANSWER: There they go again, the Coalition fighting each other. You know, I just think that's what the Coalition exists to do, every morning they get out of bed and work out how can they fight each other. It would almost be a joke except that energy prices are absolutely crippling Australian business and Australian household budgets. We have an energy crisis problem, we have a wages problem, we have a health costs problem and this government can only fight themselves. For the record it's worth noting the Coalition have had 11 energy policies. I mean, they've had three Prime Ministers, five Defence Ministers, 11 energy policies and 22 reshuffles. This is a government that lives to fight each other. They're not interested in every day Australian families. So more division, more chaos and the consequence of the government having another fight on energy policies, is that investors won't invest in new renewable energy, in new sources of energy. And when there's not investment in new energy that just means that the price of existing energy goes up and up, and Australian households and small businesses cop it in the neck from a delinquent, distracted and divided government who just aren't interested in the needs of working and middle class people.


QUESTION: Just also all your tax changes, negative gearing, CGT, franking credits etc. The election timing is going to be very tight in terms of the start of next financial year, should you win the election there'd be a fairly quick turnaround to try to get the Parliament back and actually legislate anything.
ANSWER: Listen, trying to pick what this government's next energy policy is, you've got more chance of picking the Melbourne Cup and they haven't even announced the runners. There's no point in getting attached to the government's energy policy because by the time you get to know its name and how it works, someone in the government will have changed it. Really, this is a chaotic government. If you are an Australian who wants to see action on climate change, if you are an Australian who wants to see lower energy prices for business or families give up on the government, because they've given up on you. They're too busy fighting each other. This government is chronically paralysed and will for as long as it remains in government, be incapable of taking one energy policy and putting it to the people.


QUESTION: That's what I'm wondering.
ANSWER: The voters will be the only ones who can unseat sitting Ministers. The problem for the Health Minister is he's basically become a - he's disappeared, because he knows that his ruthless push to get himself the Deputy Prime Minister's job meant that he had to support Peter Dutton, arguably Australia's most unpopular politician for good reason. You know this, the Member for Flinders divided his government, tore down Malcolm Turnbull, helped force Julie Bishop to resign. So no doubt the people in Flinders are saying what are you on about.


QUESTION: So investors will know the start dates of those policies?
ANSWER: The outcome of the election will be decided by the Australian people. But what I do know is that wherever I travel in Australia, I get a couple of common sentiments, doesn't matter if it's the tip of Cape York to the bottom of Tasmania, from around Sydney Harbour all the way to the beaches of Perth. What I hear from the Australian people is this. They say Bill we’re sick of the instability. We're sick of politicians fighting each other about themselves and not concentrating on us. You know, I get lifelong Liberals saying they don't agree with everything Labor is saying, but they do acknowledge that Labor is united, that we're stable and we're being upfront with the people putting the full range of our views. What Australian people want out of Australian politics is for one Prime Minister to be there for three years, to say what you're going to do and do what you say, and to make sure that we focus on the people. The other issue I hear wherever I travel is, what are you going to do about the fact that everything's going up except our wages? Labor's got better tax cuts, better plans to reverse the cuts to hospitals and schools, a fairer deal for Australians with better tax cuts for 10 million workers, and we're going to take real action on energy and renewable energy and climate -something this government just can't do.


QUESTION: Okay thanks Bill.
ANSWER: I'd say to the Greens, don't book your busses. What we see is that most investors aren't interested in spending a whole lot of money on new coal-fired power station without massive taxpayer subsidies. A government I lead is not going to invest taxpayer money in uncommercial, unenvironmental new coal-fired power stations.