QUESTION: Now, you’re pledging to spend a lot of money through this campaign. This morning, $4 billion. This time on childcare over four years. Can you tell us who benefits?
QUESTION: Why won't child care providers just whack up their fees?
QUESTION: More money going to wages for childcare workers. Isn't that a reason for whacking up their fees?
QUESTION: If you put in price controls how can their wages go up?
QUESTION: Isn’t the problem though that you’re trying to give something to everyone, and everyone can’t benefit. In the end someone has to pay for this and in this case it will be those childcare providers who will get less money?
QUESTION: Let's go to that. How much are you raising in taxes over the next decade. The Government says $387 billion. What's your figure?
QUESTION: You should know some of this now though, what you are raising in negative gearing and capital gains tax, what you’re doing in franking credits, so could you give us a figure over if not the next 10 years, over the next four years as to what you expect to raise.
QUESTION: I understand that, but some of this stuff would be well known to you by now because these are policies you have been working on for six years so can you give us a figure on what you intend to raise by way of cutting tax concessions and raising taxes over the next 10 years?
QUESTION: OK, if you won't or can't give us a figure on what you are raising in taxes, well can you tell people today whose taxes are going to rise in order to pay for these programs?
QUESTION: So you’re saying it’s a big transfer of wealth from people’s pockets into government’s pocket. Why would you spend it any better than they will?
QUESTION: Isn’t it a matter of priorities that you also then let people know as soon as possible where this money is coming from, because you are actually arguing for very big change in Australia and people have the right to have enough time to know where that money is coming from and where it is going to.
QUESTION: It's a big change and it's a big risk. Why should people trust you with that change?
QUESTION: Let's assume people weren't focused though, for example when you get asked through the course...
QUESTION: But when you were asked during the course of the campaign are you lifting taxes on super you should say yes, shouldn't you?
QUESTION: But you were asked about whether or not workers on over $180,000 are going to pay more tax, that's true too isn't it?
QUESTION: Sorry I will stop you there because you are not. If you are earning more than $180,000 a year, you are going to lift people's taxes, aren't you?
QUESTION: A couple of other questions, were you aware of anyone at all who is acting on Labor's behalf who was talking about preference deals with Clive Palmer? Were you aware of anyone in the Labor Party or in the union movement that was talking on your behalf?
QUESTION: Not committing you to but starting conversations about the possibility of a preference deal.
QUESTION: Did anyone...
QUESTION: Absolutely. That's understood. But did anyone with your knowledge go and approach Clive Palmer? Did you know they were making those approaches?
QUESTION: These are really good questions. Why don't you ask the Prime Minister himself on Nine News. We'll offer you a platform to do so, to go head to head with him. Why aren't you doing a prime time, head to head debate with the Prime Minister.
QUESTION: No, that's not -
QUESTION: Why not prime time, that's when we have most eyes and ears.
QUESTION: At night time -
QUESTION: You've got a big program, why wouldn't you want to debate everyone and everywhere.
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for this debate.
QUESTION: Right thanks mate.
QUESTION: The Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten, joins me now from Melbourne. Thank you very much for being with us.
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, you're unapologetically running for government on a big new agenda. So let's run through some of the detail of it beginning with climate change. Can we go back to first principles. Is it a fact that moving to a lower emissions economy will impose a short-term economic cost?
QUESTION: So if there is a short-term economic cost, you have a 45 per cent target for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, what will be the estimated cost of that to the economy over the next decade, not in dollar terms, but as a percentage of economic growth?
QUESTION: But if you have firms that have to be shifting and making the transition to having lower carbon emissions, that may mean that they have less money to spend on other forms of investment, it may mean they have lower profits so therefore they have less money to deliver in the form of company tax into government coffers. Those things could have a spin-off impact on to the GDP numbers?
QUESTION: I don't assume that there's no cost to doing nothing. I accept your position there's a long-term benefit. What I'm asking you to do is to square with the voters about exactly what the short-term cost is of getting to that position?
QUESTION: But what is the initial -
QUESTION: Isn't it a reasonable -
QUESTION: But -
QUESTION: But if we could stick with Labor -
QUESTION: You can't just pluck a number out of nowhere. You've come up with the 45 per cent target.
QUESTION: But if you are choosing that yes we will go with that number, with 45 per cent, you must have done...
QUESTION: But as a government you are adopting it as your policy. You must have done some projections short-term to what that will mean to GDP. Will it take say 0.1 per cent off GDP, 0.5 per cent off GDP over 10 years?
QUESTION: Let's turn to the Adani coal mine in Queensland. If there's a miner sitting in Rockhampton tonight watching and she wants to know, "Mr Shorten, do you reckon this mine will be a good thing for my industry and for Queensland?" What would you say to her?
QUESTION: If we can stick to Adani for now?
QUESTION: We'll go to a range of other things shortly.
QUESTION: In an interview with me on 7:30 in April last year you said, "I'm a sceptic of the project, I'm not a fan of the project. I'm happy to tell people my personal opinion." So your position has changed since then?
QUESTION: You're less sceptical of it now?
QUESTION: How about the environmental one?
QUESTION: Various Labor candidates and MPs have had differing positions on Adani, it seems a little confusing what the party's actual position is. What do you say to the suggestion that you've created that situation by saying one thing to people in regional Queensland and one thing to environmentalists?
QUESTION: Okay -
QUESTION: And I'll have the chance to ask the Prime Minister about some of that when he comes on the program. Let's move on to some other areas, you would have heard in our earlier story 83-year-old Chris Phillips, the retired carpenter who has $36,000 a year in income and he will lose $9,000 per year under your franking credits policy. Your policy is driving somebody like Chris heavily on to the public purse isn't it for everything from healthcare to social welfare?
QUESTION: Will your negative gearing policy make houses cheaper?
QUESTION: So what's the point of having it then? Because I seem to recall when it was introduced, it was partly to make housing more affordable?
QUESTION: You say it won't drive housing prices down by very much. Can Australia afford to adopt a policy that drives housing prices down at the moment at all given that the Reserve Bank said in its last minutes that rapidly falling housing prices are currently a downside risk in the economy?
QUESTION: I'll come to some of those points in a second. I just want to ask about another of your controversial policies which is superannuation...
QUESTION: Superannuation I'm talking about. Paul Keating and others set up superannuation so it would entice people to save for their retirement so they would be less of a burden on Government across all demographics. Why are you making it less enticing for any Australian given that that's the whole point of it?
QUESTION: You spoke about the tax on income versus the tax on capital. Paul Keating made a point in a letter to the editor of the Financial Review last August that having 49 percent as the top marginal tax rate is way too high, especially when company tax is 30 percent. Where's Labor going to draw the line on relying on the rich to fund new spending? For example would more than 50 percent as the top marginal income tax rate be too much? Would 60 percent be where you'd draw the line? Where would you draw it?
QUESTION: Let’s talk about what you might control if you are the Prime Minister by the end of the month, you've said that you'll deliver a 20 percent wage increase to childcare workers, that it's the only sector for which you'll do that because it's unique. What's unique about childcare workers but not aged care workers or disability carers?
QUESTION: Everybody would agree with that but doesn't it set a precedent -
QUESTION: Doesn't it set a precedent for the Federal Government to pay wages for other private sector workers in the form of direct subsidies?
QUESTION: When we take all of the policies that we've talked about tonight, is it fair for a viewer to conclude that a Shorten Labor Government will be at its core about the redistribution of wealth, that you want to take more from the wealthy and give more to people on lower incomes?
QUESTION: But as I said, when we go through your policies, a lot of where you're getting your revenue from is taxes on wealthy people, closing loopholes that mostly wealthy people can exploit and you're wanting to spend money on lower income people. How is that not a form of changing the economy towards a model of redistribution?
QUESTION: But if you - if you reject the assertion -
QUESTION: No, no, no, but what I want you to do is try to do it -
QUESTION: Because if I'm wrong, if I am wrong and it's the core of your government is not about taxing wealthy people to redistribute income to lower incomes, in a sentence, what is going to be the core of the Shorten Labor Government?
QUESTION: That's a matter for me to Scott Morrison about. With all -
QUESTION: If you need to have a glass of water while I ask the question, please feel free.
QUESTION: If - you listed out that list of things that you would like to deliver, the issue for you in an election campaign are that voters have to trust that you will actually deliver on that. Why should they trust Labor to deliver on that? You'd point, for example, just to your last thing there, to chaos. People remember the last couple of terms of Labor in office.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, we've covered a lot of ground tonight. I'm sure our viewers appreciate your time very much. Thank you.
QUESTION: On your announcement today Mr Shorten, there are number of examples of renewable projects in the Upper Spencer falling over, the solar thermal plant in Port Augusta for the most recent example, how is this plan going to change anything?
QUESTION: Some of the issue was getting workers to the upper Spencer area. How are you going to solve that problem with your plan?
QUESTION: Mr Butler on climate change yesterday you said it was impossible to model Labor's policies but Labor has also promised that the details will be released before the election. Which is it? Impossible to cost? Or will costings be released?
QUESTION: Would you rule out another climate deal with the Greens? And do you think that the Gillard Greens deal in 2011 was a success?
QUESTION: On health you've announced a range of health policies. Do you rule out in the next term of government lifting the Medicare levy for high income earners?
QUESTION: A few months ago, Chris Bowen said voters unconvinced about your plans for taxation were perfectly entitled to vote for other parties. What about voters unconvinced by your answers about climate change and working with the Greens? What should they do?
QUESTION: I get that it's uncomfortable for you in an election campaign to say that you would go into a deal with the Greens, but doesn't everybody in this country know that you can't get your climate deal through any Parliament we could imagine without coalitions of some sort. So if you're not getting into bed with the Greens, who are you going to get into bed with to carry your climate plans?
QUESTION: Clive Palmer is going to be in town tomorrow. So is Mark Latham from One Nation. They're expected to announce Murray-Darling river plans. Will Labor have anything in addition to say about the Marray Darling basin plan before the election.
QUESTION: He has.
QUESTION: You said you want 50 per cent electric cars by 2030. If a Labor government wins the election, would you provide subsidies for, you know, Gupta electric cars or other providers?
QUESTION: Would you provide subsidies?
QUESTION: With your emissions reduction target, you say that businesses will take the reins with how they choose to reduce pollution. How can you be sure that they will do that? Would you introduce civil penalties for non-compliance?
QUESTION: Wasn't the safeguards mechanism introduced by Tony Abbott, not Malcolm Turnbull?
QUESTION: It's interesting that you're using the Tony Abbott climate change mechanism.
QUESTION: What are your assumptions on the amount of international credits that will be brought by business under your policy? And what are your assumptions on the future pricing of these credits? And I understand the PBO can't do costings but if you haven't got those assumptions, why not get them before the election from an economist?
QUESTION: But do you have assumptions on the amount of international credits that business will buy because at the moment...
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, on Jeremy Hearn, a couple of days ago, your Senate candidate in the Northern Territory resigned after sharing anti-Semitic posts on social media. If one candidate is responsible and reflective of the entire party, aren't Labor also in trouble on this?
QUESTION: Just on climate change, do you acknowledge the simple fact that you're asking Australians to vote for something without knowing what the full cost of it will be? And can you understand why that worries people?
QUESTION: (inaudible) Are you concerned that people in northern Tasmania’s arts community might feel dudded by the $50 million MONA pledge and see it effectively as a handout to a wealthy entrepreneur in the state's south?
QUESTION: Have you been approached to fund or are you considering funding aerobridges for Hobart and Launceston airports and improving commuter safety.
QUESTION: The Greens came to Launceston yesterday and they announced their national health policy and they are looking to see dental care included under Medicare. Do you have a response to that?
QUESTION: Will you work with the Greens though on more coverage?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten on the Indigenous voice to Parliament, if you go to the people without a fully formed model, does that open up the chance of a fear campaign? Does it make it harder to sell to the public? And on top of that, you're also planning a first term Republican plebiscite - is it too much? Is it too many things to sell with these big votes?
QUESTION: How much money has Labor set aside to help drought-proof our farmers?
QUESTION: The foreign fighter laws that weren't passed by Parliament before it was prorogued, would you put them to a vote in the first week of your government in you're successful at the election?
QUESTION: Do you commit to putting both referendums in the first term, even if there isn't bipartisan agreement on them, especially the voice to Parliament, and doesn’t that raise the risk of a seriously damaging, and possibly a no vote as a result, a damaging campaign, that is overwhelmed by politics?
QUESTION: You’ve said that there have been no formal negotiations on preferences between Labor and Mr Palmer. But do you concede that Labor did approach him about a preference deal, as he has again confirmed this morning?
QUESTION: Can you clarify your comments on Sky, did you say there were no conversations with Labor...
QUESTION: Can you clarify, did you say there were no conversations with Labor powerbrokers at all?
QUESTION: What about legislation? You say they shouldn't be brought into the mainstream. That means that Labor won't deal with them in the next Parliament?
QUESTION: Could you answer the question?
QUESTION: If you feel that strongly about him why won't Labor rule out any dealing with Clive Palmer's party should you win the election?
QUESTION: Your proposal for a debate at the National Press Club, will that be in prime time and if not, why not?
QUESTION: A local question. Is Labor disappointed that Macquarie Point is still sitting idle? [Inaudible] unlike here it has not been activated at all.
QUESTION: Tasmanian Liberals have come out today and said this funding as well as a commitment to push for a Tasmanian AFL team, that these funding commitments are out of touch with the community. What would your response be to that?
QUESTION: On childcare, Mr Shorten why are you keeping the activity test in place which means that families in which women decide not to work won't get access to this? Previously, Amanda Rishworth has been opposed to the activity test, so why are you keeping it in place, and what's the review of the activity test going to achieve?
QUESTION: Just to clarify though, Mr Shorten, would you like to see the activity test eventually scrapped following this review?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you promised a pay rise for childcare workers, why not single out workers in other low paid industries and give them a similar pay rise? If not, could that not open the flood gates for union claims for pay rises in other sectors?
QUESTION: You have repeated your line that everything is going up except your wages. If most workers in Australia don't get a pay rise, will your first term have been a failure?
QUESTION: But if you do.
QUESTION: On preferences, you made your feelings about Clive Palmer very clear. Why is one of your candidates in Tasmania Julie Collins preferences his candidates second?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, just on this issue of Clive Palmer, the Newspoll today seems to suggest his popularity is on the rise. If you do win the election next month and Palmer does hold some sort of sway in the Senate, do you think you will be able to negotiate with him and get your agenda through, which is fairly ambitious?
QUESTION: The Northern Territory candidate Wayne Kurnoth has posted some questionable social media posts. How worried are you in the Northern Territory practices that he was pre-selected?
QUESTION: Should the CFMEU be suing Victorian Police for blocking them from inspecting a work site?
QUESTION: Can I ask on mining, do you support Tanya's view yesterday, you said that Indian mining companies are not capable of providing jobs in Queensland?
QUESTION: Not yesterday, the other day. Do you support that and what is your stance on Adani?
QUESTION: Just on wages Mr Shorten you said before that childcare workers would be the first. Are we looking at a raft of almost unprecedented government intervention in getting wage rises and will other industries expect it?
QUESTION: It's not isolated though.
QUESTION: On your climate change policy, you have said that it's impossible to price and you have also quoted research saying it would have the same economic impact as the Coalition's policy. Let's put all this to rest, why couldn't you have costed this with the PBO before the election, just like you did your negative gearing policy? And they could have taken into account the cost of climate change, which you've said is over $10 billion, you've quoted a figure on that as well.
QUESTION: Will you be extending the childcare wage subsidy to other industries and if not, why did you say yesterday that childcare would be the first sector?
QUESTION: Will you review the RBA's target rate for inflation if you win the election?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've just described the recent inflation number unless I’m wrong as alarming.
QUESTION: Well, tell me if I'm taking you out of context here because I wanted to get a sense of how much peril you believe the Australian economy is in when inflation is flat-lining. Just how bad is it?
QUESTION: Can I ask you your reaction to Steve Dickson resigning from One Nation over the strip club incident.
QUESTION: On wages, what about aged care workers, don't they deserve a pay increase as well and can you promise that to that industry?
QUESTION: Which childcare workers will get the pay increase, will it be all of them?
QUESTION: On the economy and interest rates, if the Reserve Bank decides to reduce interest rates next  month, a rate reduction during the height of an election campaign, what do you think that that says about the economy?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, on religious freedom what do you say to schools like this one about your promise to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to stop them from choosing the teachers of religious faith that they want to and also what do you say to Mr Morrison about that issue.
QUESTION: Do we need a religious discrimination Act in Australia.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten on today's announcement Brian Fisher has modelled the economic cost of your climate change policy. Between $260 and $540 billion. If you say that's wrong why don't you provide your own costings then?
QUESTION: Whether you believe the figures that are in the report or not doesn't it show that the numbers can still be crunched and it's not actually impossible to get a figure?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten you implore Australians to accept the outcome of experts with regard to whether the Adani mine should go ahead or not. You now have an expert giving a mixed finding on your climate plan and you tipping a bucket on them from a great height. Why shouldn't Australians conclude you're cherry picking you experts?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten I spoke to a couple of the audience members after the debate on Monday. They were undecided over the costs of your climate policies. So by not releasing your own modelling are you willing to lose voters over it?
QUESTION: Mr Butler said this morning there will probably be a limit on the number or proportion of international credits that will be allowed to reduce emissions in Australia under your scheme. What will that limit be? Will it be more than 50 per cent, more than 75 per cent? Should voters have a right to know approximately a ballpark figure about what that would be? Because it will have an influence on the overall cost.
QUESTION: On electrical car policy you've got no policy that actually... the 50 per cent target except for rolling out chargers... So would you be willing to intervene in the market for subsidies if it turns out that [inaudible] or is it just going to be a let's wait and see thing. And is your renewables target similarly aspirational just like your electric car targets?
QUESTION: If you're not getting to that target though, would you be prepared intervene with subsidies.
QUESTION: Childcare, Mr Shorten. Will your pay rise, will people need to be on an EA to get that pay rise and will they need to be a member of the union?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison today has announced a couple of hundred million dollars towards the PBS threshold to give patients that need medication free sooner, is that a good policy and will you match it?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Can I just ask also on childcare, just following up on from Chris. Do you know you know the annual cost or the ongoing annual cost of your childcare policy? After this initial eight year period the government has costed it as and it's in today's Herald and Age at about $1.6 billion. Is that accurate?
QUESTION: Just putting aside the Fisher report for a moment do you accept as a basic principle that your more ambitious emission reduction total will come with a higher cost to the economy.
QUESTION: Tanya can I just ask do you as an MP in Sydney do you feel any sympathy for Tony Abbott having faced the defacing of his... clearly not.
QUESTION: There's not much left except to say do you feel sympathy for Tony Abbott given his posters have been defaced in the way that they've been defaced.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can we ask you about your thoughts on the news that one of the Sri Lankan bombers appears to have studied in Australia?
QUESTION: Just quickly, how do you reflect on the fact that this seems to be the new-norm, that you've got an ANZAC Day service and ANZAC Day services that are under threat from alleged extremists and Islamists?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, your candidate for McPherson, has said during the campaign that Labor is committed to reviewing the Adani - the federal approvals for Adani. Belinda Hassan, the candidate for Dawson, has said that twice now, that Labor may review it. Why are your candidates under the impression that you're committed to a review?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the worker who approached you yesterday in Gladstone, earning $250,000 –
QUESTION: Good money. 
QUESTION: Yeah. Well wouldn't it have been straightforward and honest of you to say to him, you're going to deny him a tax cut that the Government is offering, and increase his taxes by 2 per cent. 
QUESTION: To be fair, what you said to him yesterday was that you would look at it. As somebody who is weeks away from the election and your shadow minister this morning told us that you were just being courteous to this worker by saying that. Is it more than being courteous, is it being misleading given we're this close to election?
QUESTION: On water buybacks, Labor's position is for a Commission of Inquiry?
QUESTION: Why not a Royal Commission? Is it an acknowledgement that there have been too many Royal Commissions, there's some creep going on in that space?
QUESTION: At a recent WeChat Q&A, you avoided answering questions about Huawei, Chinese interference and negative views of the Chinese Communist Party in Australia. Was that a case of self-censoring to meet the WeChat and Communist Party rules? 
QUESTION: You’ve said that there'll be no review of the Adani project. Could you be precise? What are you talking about? There’ll be no review of the recent groundwater decision, there’ll be no review of the project, there’ll be no review of any environmental approval that's already been undertaken, what do you mean by that?
QUESTION: But do you have a plan to review the recent groundwater management decision which Tony Burke and many of your spokespeople have indicated that, have built the case basically for a review by saying that Melissa Price was bullied into that decision. Do you mean you will not review that decision?
QUESTION: You’ve got one candidate saying that there will be a review of Adani, another saying hand on heart there won't be, and you say there are no plans to. Do you concede that your messaging on this issue is inconsistent?
QUESTION: What do you think of the ad by GetUp that showed Tony Abbott as a lifeguard allowing people to drown and what do you think of GetUp itself as an organisation you helped set up?
QUESTION: You say your position is consistent but Labor's message as a party isn't consistent, don't voters deserve to know what you actually... (inaudible)
QUESTION: Why were they under that impression Mr Shorten surely that would indicate that they are getting that messaging from campaign headquarters or out of your office if they're saying Labor is committed to reviewing these latest approvals by Melissa Price. 
QUESTION: Greg that dog's not going to hunt mate. Let me just answer the question. That dog's not going to hunt. A scare campaign. I’ll be saying that we are not going to review Adani, full stop. We have no plans. 
QUESTION: You're saying your position is consistent but on the consistency of your position in the past year you've said you're against Adani. 
QUESTION: Well I can give you the quote if you like?
QUESTION: You said that you were … sceptical …
QUESTION: … of the commercial pace for Adani …
QUESTION: … and you said that you don't like it, so do you remain sceptical of the commercial pace? Do you like it now? What is your position just for consistency’s sake? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten you made a virtue throughout this campaign of saying let's be honest, let's be upfront with people. When the man asked you yesterday for a tax cut, why weren't you honest with him and simply said we are going to tax you more? 
QUESTION: But you're not, you're going to tax him two per cent more, debt levy.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten when you were in Darwin you were asked a story around that, Labor ruling out tax cuts and tax relief for people earning over $90,000 in preference of that going to essential services like schools and hospitals. This gentleman was asking about people on $250,000, so very much up there in terms of income earning. If this man goes into the election on May 18 voting for Labor because you've told him you will look at tax cuts for people like him, like his colleagues on similar earnings, has he been misled and is he voting for a different Labor Party than he thinks he is? 
QUESTION: How did you not you say this to the gentleman yesterday? 
QUESTION: Do you believe that nationalising coal fired power stations and energy generators generally is a good idea? 
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, inflation has come out today at zero per cent, below expectations. What does that mean for the economy?
QUESTION: Just on WeChat, why is your account registered to an unidentified man in Shandong province and are you comfortable with subjecting yourself to the political censorship that goes with that platform? 
QUESTION: What do you make of Turkish locals being banned from attending those Gallipoli services?
QUESTION: What is your gut reaction to it though, banning locals from attending the local service? 
QUESTION: Just on your climate change policy how is it congruent to open up the Betaloo Basin and Labor’s 45 per cent emissions reduction target?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, yesterday, repeatedly, you refused to rule out reviewing the environmental approvals - the federal environmental approvals for Adani. Can you be fair dinkum with us and with voters and tell us do you rule out reviewing those approvals?
QUESTION: So well on that, Mr. Shorten, in the past you have said you don't support Adani, you said you're sceptical of it, and the CFMEU has issued this pledge which several of your candidates, including Mr. Beers have either signed or said they're going to sign. It's calling on you not to do anything to stand in the way of this project. So will do you anything to stand in the way of the project?
QUESTION: If you become the Prime Minister, will the CFMEU be allowed to enforce closed shops on construction sites, no ticket no work?
QUESTION: Could the resurrection of Clive Palmer cost you the election? 
QUESTION: On George Christensen, what do you think he was doing in the Philippines for 294 days? 
QUESTION: LNP candidate Gerard Rennick has been caught spreading conspiracy theories about climate change and some curious ideas about your preschool policy. What action, if any, should be taken against the candidate, and can you guarantee you would also apply that same standard to any of your candidates caught in a similar situation?
QUESTION: Can I ask Mr Beers a question about the Adani project. Mr Shorten saying that he has no plans to review approvals is hardly ruling a review out. What do you think of that and is this hurting the chances of you winning the seat?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, I have a question for you and also a question for Mr Beers as well.
QUESTION: Related. So you are confirming that you are not going to sign this CFMEU pledge to not stand in the way of Adani. I just want to get clarity on that. And Mr Beers, you did sign this pledge. Why did you do that, and should Bill Shorten sign it?
QUESTION: The ACTU wants to see the minimum wage rise by $50 a week. Is that the sort of increase you want to see?
QUESTION: How do you expect small businesses to cope with the costs that you're loading them up with, with these increases?
QUESTION: Can I ask you a question about costs because costs have started to become a theme of the press conference. We don't have an answer to the cost for small businesses when it comes to lifting wages because we don't know how much you would like to lift wages. Small businesses and businesses at large don't have an answer as to how much they are going to be hit to meet your emissions reduction target. When will we start to learn a little bit more about your electric vehicle target and the cost to households and businesses there?
QUESTION: Just on the Greens, they want to end coal mining by 2030. Some in Queensland would say that is an extreme policy. Would you be willing to preference them below the Coalition?
QUESTION: So are you questioning the credibility of the Department, considering they said it was a fair market price that was paid?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, campaign headquarters dodged questions yesterday about whether you would review Federal Environmental approvals for the Adani coalmine if you become Prime Minister. Tanya Plibersek has also dodged those questions on the weekend. Can we get a clear answer - will you review them and the process involved as well as the approvals themselves?
QUESTION: Will you review the approval, the approval that, just two days before the election from Melissa Price, will you have another look at them?
QUESTION: If you win the election, how much of an increase to the minimum wage will Labor support this year?
QUESTION: If we can go back to the Murray Darling. This isn't the first issue around that system and there is the suggestion particularly from the Greens that Labor needs to commit to a Royal Commission. Is that something you'll commit to or is Labor leaving the door open to a Royal Commission into the Murray Darling.
QUESTION: What about Labor's record, though, Mr. Burke, the Prime Minister has just said that EAA was a company that the previous Labor Government has dealt with and this arrangement was dwarfed by the amounts committed under the previous Government?
QUESTION: Just to be clear, with the Adani groundwater decisions that were made just before the election was called, is Labor ruling out reviewing those decisions, and if you're not ruling it out, in what circumstances would you see those decisions being reviewed?
QUESTION: Can you rule out the review, Mr Shorten? Secondly, you continue to say you'll wait to see if Adani stacks up, do you want it to stack up? 
QUESTION: Voters want to know.
QUESTION: Mr. Shorten you've accused Coalition Members of bullying Mrs. Price over that decision she made just before the election, doesn't that suggest that there was a problem with that process and therefore why wouldn't there be a review?
QUESTION: Your letter to Martin Parkinson about the latest politicisation of the bureaucracy, will there be a night of the long knives under a Shorten Government to hack off the heads of these Department Secretaries?
QUESTION: Will you keep Martin Parkinson at Prime Minister and Cabinet?
QUESTION: So Phil Gaetjens for example, would be Treasury Secretary under a Shorten Government?
QUESTION: Scott Morrison is spending a lot of time in Victoria. How confident are you that you will pick up seats there?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten just on wages you've promised within 100 days if you win power to legislate overturning that Fair Work Commission if what's required to get Senate support for that measure is to legislate a ban on unions trading away penalty's, is that something you're willing to explore?
QUESTION: Would this then lead to small businesses then cutting peoples hours and cutting staff because they can't afford to because they can't afford to pay those extra penalty rates which they've said time and time again that they can't do?
QUESTION: But do you know if it will lead to people in the industry reinstated?
QUESTION: Does today's announcement mean that you will not seek to legislate changes to the Fair Work Act to increase the minimum wage or will you will just rely on submissions?
QUESTION: On that subject who do you talk about meaningful wage rises, Brendan O'Connor has just talked about a real wage increase which is something above inflation I guess. This is central to your pitch to Australian people, don't they need to know what that actually means in dollar terms, how much of an increase do you want to give an average worker under a Shorten Government? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Commission was set up for a reason. Is it right for any government of the day to be able to overturn a decision that came from the Fair Work Commission? 
QUESTION: Warwick McKibbin who you pinned your climate change costings on last week, he came out today and said that you are wrong to say that international permits can alleviate the cost of your policy because the future of them is too uncertain. Does this put one big hole in your policy?
QUESTION: [inaudible]
QUESTION: Why didn't you speak to McKibbin before you reference this report last week? This is what you based your costings on last week and he said you haven't spoken to him about this 4-year-old report?
QUESTION: Will you rule out a death tax?
QUESTION: What can you tell us about the $80 million water sale, that has hit headlines this week? Do you have concerns about that purchase that the government made and if so, what are those concerns or what are the questions that you have?
QUESTION: So Mr. Shorten, be specific. What does the Prime Minister need do with regard to the water problem right now in the middle of an election campaign to set it right? What can, and should, he do?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, costs on your emission reduction target, you said you have spoken about the government and you said it was going to be very large. It can only make sense by reason that your target is much higher than the government's, so that it must be larger, and those costs are going to go passed on to companies who have to buy carbon credits, and those costs are then going to be passed on to consumers. Why can't you say what the dollar figure is, that businesses are going to be asked to pay when it comes to buying those credits, so that consumers can understand what it is going to cost them. Can you give us a single figure on what it is going to cost, sir?
QUESTION: [inaudible}
QUESTION: It’s not an answer, do you have a figure as to what it’s going to cost for businesses, who will pass that cost onto consumers? Because there has to be a dollar figure.
QUESTION: But do you concede that that cost would be passed on to consumers?
QUESTION: But it is going to be much bigger.
QUESTION: Will you pursue the NEG in government if the opposition is opposed to it …
QUESTION: If we can keep on climate change for just a little bit longer, you have dismissed the $25 billion figure and the $60 billion dollar figure that was put out; you say that the Government’s policies are going to be expensive. So you have looked at the economic cost and not necessarily the cost-benefit analysis, but just the cost of certain policies. The benefit is quite a way away. Do you know just the cost to the economy, not to the government and not to taxpayers coffers, on businesses, on the economy of your policies.
QUESTION: $165 million dollars today on health expenditure, in regional Australia and in Westmead Hospital in Sydney Mr Shorten, not from Labor, but from the Prime Minister. Having gone so hard on health for so long in this campaign, you’d applaud that wouldn’t you?
QUESTION: What questions do say that government needs to answer over the $80 million dollar water deal?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the member for Solomon said that there would be a support package for the NT. Will the Federal Government or a Federal Labor Government be bailing out the Northern Territory from their current financial crisis?
QUESTION: Will that include GST top-ups?
QUESTION: Will there be any cost to business under Labor's climate change plans?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten on the question of tax cuts, there's a report in newspapers this morning suggesting that Labor has taken a decision not to offer additional tax cuts for people on incomes between $90,000 and $120,000 or $125,000 a year. Can I – one – ask, can you confirm that Labor has taken that decision? And - two, if you can – what’s that say to people on those incomes? Doesn't it say, "You've got enough money and you're doing well"?
QUESTION: The Australian is suggesting that your carbon credits policy would cost Australians $25 billion. I take it it's a figure you reject. How much would it cost? 
QUESTION: Thank you. Isn't this issue starting to get a bit away from you? Is it a bit glib to blame News Limited? Shouldn't you announce the costings, bring that forward, bring voters in on your plans?
QUESTION: Do you have a rough figure at least on how much it would cost?
QUESTION: A report in the paper today states the McKibbin report estimates that it would cost businesses $25 billion by 2030 to buy the foreign carbon credits. Can you say how much money you believe Australian businesses will have to pay to buy these carbon credits over the next decade? Is this the $25 billion figure accurate? Is it more? Is it less?
QUESTION: $25 billion is a lie, Mr Shorten, you say, but isn't the problem here you don't have a number to put in its place? And as long as you don't have a number to put in its place, why should we be confident that you're taking the Australian economy somewhere where you know how it's going to be affected at the end of the line?
QUESTION: On Indigenous Affairs, Bill Shorten, Labor has said it will abolish the Community Development Program, and is campaigning hard on that issue here in the Territory. What is your new plan, and if you can't tell us today, will that be outlined before the election?
QUESTION: The announcement you've made today, about ending and addressing youth suicide, and some of those other issues, isn't the core issue here, though making sure that people can participate in a real economy in some of these communities? And how is the Shorten Government going to change what's going on at the moment to ensure that can happen, and will some reform of the Land Rights Act be part of that? 
QUESTION: What are your thoughts then, on the Northern Territory Government handing back the leases on 44 remote communities to the Coalition, then? And what would Labor do differently if they were in Government? Would they solve this housing stoush with the NT Government?
QUESTION: Ms King, can I ask you about chest pain clinics, if that's okay? 
QUESTION: Would Labor support BDI or Baker IDI's call for rapid chest pain clinics to be rolled out, is that something you would support?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, regarding, on the-
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, regarding your claim that with your climate policies, we'd have GDP growth of 23 per cent in the 2020s, is that business as usual, the same as if you didn't have the climate plan, and where did you get the numbers from, I understand it's from the McKibbin report, but isn't that a bit outdated?
QUESTION: I understand that figure was from the McKibbin report, isn't that a bit outdated now? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, yesterday when you said you had no intention of increasing taxes on superannuation, were you not including already proposed Labor policies of up to $34 billion worth of changes to the super savings? Were you just saying there wouldn't be any new ones, or did you forget that policy?
QUESTION: So, I'd like to clarify the compulsory employer contributions. Will you increase that? It is at 9 per cent currently, would you increase that? And what would you say to the Grattan Institute report that says that could hurt low-income Australians?
QUESTION: Sorry, Chris. The Grattan Institute is warning that an increase to the compulsory super guarantee to employees would hurt low income workers.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten you’ve referenced in your modelling which shows that your emissions target reduction would cost the same as the Government's. How will it cost the same as the Government’s, considering that you have a bigger target? How will it cost the same?
QUESTION: The question on superannuation yesterday was very clear. It's hard to believe that you misunderstood it. You could easily have specified that you only meant you would add no more policies on top of the ones already announced. Does it not look dishonest, like you’re trying to hide something when you don't mention that?
QUESTION: You have an opportunity today to clear the record and be up-front with the Australian people about how much you will raise income taxes on superannuation.
QUESTION: Do you dispute the Government's figure of $34 billion over a decade?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten opposed to superannuation taxation, income tax. The Government is going to the election with tax cuts aimed at people on $90,000 to $120,000 in 2022. They are not high income earners, if you live in Sydney, you live in Perth, that is not a high income. What do you say to those people that, under your present plan, you are not offering anything else?
QUESTION: You ruled out any further changes to superannuation taxes.
QUESTION: Other than what you've announced, yes. What about any changes to superannuation arrangements to stop accounts being eaten up by fees and exorbitant charges?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, every day you say to Australians that everything is going up except the wages, the Grattan report says that the change to the super guarantee could keep wages down by 2 per cent. Are they wrong?
QUESTION: With your climate change policy, what proportion of the emissions reduction will be required from the electricity sector?
QUESTION: On wages, Mr Shorten, you'll be meeting with some more workers today, but I would like to find out what you are going to do to increase their wages beyond your policies of re-introducing penalty rates and cracking down on labour hire. How will you work to increase the wages of people who are not on the minimum wage?
QUESTION: On Jane’s question, sorry, the cut in the electricity sector, will that be more than the 26 per cent cut in that sector that the Coalition is promising?
QUESTION: -In the electricity sector?
QUESTION: Can I just confirm that-
QUESTION: Good morning, Mr Shorten.
QUESTION: You've had 23 hours to think about yesterday's answer. Can you give final detail on how much the emissions reduction target will impact the economy? What that figure will be? And you've talked about offsets. How much money do you expect or believe you need to spend on those international offsets to meet your target?
QUESTION: I'm not sure that's a financial figure, though, in just how much it's going to cost the economy, because BA Economics says it will cost $472 billion over the next 10 years? Do you disagree with that, and if so, how much is it going to cost?
QUESTION: Is there a figure on how much it's going to cost the economy?
QUESTION: What if we don’t grow. There’s forecasts now that we're facing increasing headwinds, domestically and internationally. There's businesses out there which are concerned about facing a recession. What happens if we don't grow over the next five years?
QUESTION: Can I take you to George Christensen, and a tip of the hat to Galloway here, as well: George Christensen, is it right that he used taxpayer funds for flights connecting to overseas?
QUESTION: Chris Bowen, can I ask, I know-
QUESTION: Chris Bowen, can I ask you, are you suggesting that the Liberals have scrubbed clean their website of information that would embarrass them, or is the webmaster there just having a bad day.
QUESTION: But you could release the pages that you have taken off the Labor website so we could look at them and see whether they have been excluded because of embarrassing mistakes.
QUESTION: Can I just confirm with the emissions reduction target that you will release full costings that will answer Jonathon’s question before the election?
QUESTION: In regards to Labor’s wages policy, the Fair Work Commission which sets the minimum wages was set up be a Labor Government. At the time, neither Labor nor yourself as Minister was complaining about decisions the Fair Work Commission was making. Can you explain what’s actually changed between now and then that we now have a problem in the decisions that they are making.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, this morning you were with asked about the Sharrouf children being brought back. What possible reason is there for not bringing them back to their family in Australia?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, significant parts of your negative gearing policy have been taken down from Labor’s website, charts and graphics explaining how the policies will work. Can you explain why that’s happened?
QUESTION: Do you, and if you do, why do you believe that Australian taxpayer money should go towards helping restore Notre Dame?
QUESTION: Notre Dame, in Paris.
QUESTION: Should Australian special forces be used to get the Sharrouf children and other Australian children out of Syria?
QUESTION: In regards to your living wage policy, can you clarify who the 1.2 million workers you promised a pay rise are? Where did you get this figure from and can you explain who exactly it is, given that 180,000 workers are on the adult minimum wage?
QUESTION: Have you or any of our colleagues spoken to Sam Dastyari about today's pathology announcement?
QUESTION: But can I bring you back to the question?
QUESTION: You haven’t answered whether your colleagues have spoken to him.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten there's been allegations that that Liberal Party's candidate in Chisholm made homophobic comments. Does she need to apologise and does the Prime Minister need to intervene?
QUESTION: Can you rule out no new or increased taxes on superannuation?
QUESTION: That’s different from ruling it out though.
QUESTION: So will you rule it out?
QUESTION: You have spoken almost exclusively since your budget in reply speech and focused on health. When can voters learn more about Labor's emission reduction target, how you will get there and the cost to the economy?
QUESTION: Some of your staffers have said the same in private conversations.
QUESTION: You didn't answer the question. Answer the question, when can people know, Mr Shorten, the cost to the economy. You didn't answer the question. You should answer the question. That's why we're here to ask questions, why can't you answer the question?
QUESTION: Why won't you answer the question, Mr Shorten?
QUESTION: On pathology, nine out of 10 pathology blood tests are done out of hospitals. 99 per cent of those are bulk billed. How can you say the system’s at breaking point when the rate is at 99 per cent? And can you guarantee this $200 million will not just fill the bottom lines of pathology companies?
QUESTION: Surely pathology companies come to you and say we want more money, do you just roll over and accept that argument without scrutiny, and is that  the process that applies to other industries as well?
QUESTION: But hasn't the government done a better job? It was 97 per cent in 2013, when you guys left office, and it's above 99 per cent now?
QUESTION: If it remains high today, how can you say it's at breaking point?
QUESTION: Could I ask on those 90 excluded pages re your capital gains and negative gearing changes, you say there are new assumptions, so they need updating, which is a very fine thing. How do the assumptions change the costings on those two programs, and assuming that they're not affected, would you release the 90 pages so we can have a look?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten in Boothby do you support the South Australian government's plans for the Repat general hospital, and if so will you match the $35 million in Coalition funding pledged?
QUESTION: Yes please.
QUESTION: The health minister here says they haven't heard from Labor at all on this issue.
QUESTION: In terms of the Sharrouf children, is there anything more the Government should be doing there, and if they do come home are there particular measures that you would like to see in place to make sure they're not some kind of threat?
QUESTION: South Australian irrigators have been told over the last 24 hours they will only get 14 per cent of the allocation which they were hoping they would get. They feared they might get 50 per cent, they were hoping to get 100 per cent. What is Labor's plan to fix the Murray and does it include or could it include resparking up this $2.2 billion desalination plant that we have here?
QUESTION: Will you sack the CFMEU's Michael Ravbar from the Labor national executive now he's been fined by the Federal Court?
QUESTION: Do you think it's appropriate that Sam Dastyari's employer will make a motza out of today's announcement?
QUESTION: On the weekend you made some very strong comments about people spending more than $3,000 managing tax affairs, you said it was a loophole and a rort. Are you surprised organisations like the CPA and the Institute of Public accountants are making such partisan opposition to that during the election campaign? Usually they would be a bit less in the thick of the political campaign.
QUESTION: [inaudible]
QUESTION: So if restoration were a decision for a Shorten Government to take, what would you do?
QUESTION: Before we let you go this morning, there is a report that the Government's numbers, as such,a Grattan Institute examination suggests that it could be $40 billion a year short on its surplus unless it picks – or cuts in harder with taxes or something, or spending cuts to pay the difference, your response?
QUESTION: Finally, were you surprised by that? Did that shock you or were those numbers you'd seen in the Budget and expected? 
QUESTION: Firstly, tell us why you’re here today?
QUESTION: We have been asking our listeners this morning, Mr Shorten, to text through questions for you. I’d like to read you this text from Tim. He says “I’m really worried as a small businessman I’ve watched my business go from 15 staff to five since the McGowan government came to power and our local Albany economy has gone into freefall. Things are only going to get worse under a new government obsessed with all things green. When are you going to explain how your climate change policies will impact the economy?”
QUESTION: People are looking at the hiccups and stumbles at a time like this when you are focusing on an upcoming election, and such was the case yesterday afternoon, where you were seen to not answer a question that was asked by a journalist, and we have another question from a listener from Owen, asking what are the costings for your renewables and greenhouse gas emission policies, you owe it to the people of Australia to be transparent on this.
QUESTION: So the costs are the same?
QUESTION: I mean, the thing with these climate change policies, these policies take time. You know, natural disasters are not going to stop the moment a good policy is agreed to.
QUESTION: No, but it may take a century to recover from that situation.
QUESTION: Vote Compass is the online tool that ABC is using during the election campaign to gauge Australians’ views on the policies, taking the personalities out of it. The number one issue here in Western Australia is not the environment, but the economy, and that is the concern, and that is where they don’t trust you.
QUESTION: But electric cars actually cost more, at the moment.
QUESTION: (laughs) Not seeing what’s coming down over the road is quite an amazing analogy because I don’t think even you could have realised that electric cars were going to be the hot spot that it is. But the hot button issue –
QUESTION: Every time we talk about it, we get loads of people talking about it, for and against.
QUESTION: But you would rather they didn’t.
QUESTION: Bill Shorten is our guest, I beg your pardon, on ABC Radio Perth and WA, the Leader of the Opposition. Let’s go back to questions from our listeners.
QUESTION: A lot of people make the point that $3000 or $2500 is what pays for their health insurance every year, they make arrangements years in advance based on what you call a gift so why don't you grandfather these arrangements? 
QUESTION: Bill Shorten there are a number of tightly held seats in Western Australia that you're fighting over at the moment. There are some that you would give up on and one of them would be Curtin but you did play a surprise hand I guess when came to delivering a candidate to Curtin for the ALP, and with it looked like the aim of disruption I guess, Melissa Parke, I am talking about and she of course now has stood down as the candidate for the ALP for the seat of Curtin over, some people would say, embarrassing comments that she made claiming that a Palestinian woman was forced to drink bleach at the Israeli border. How do you feel about the remarks and your decision to endorse her in the first place? 
QUESTION: So you didn't ask her to stand down? 
QUESTION: Are you embarrassed by it? 
QUESTION: And now Josh Wilson supports a two-state solution in Israel and that is also causing you some tension? 
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, will any elected WA Labor members make their way onto a Government front bench if you win?
QUESTION: Pat Dodson? 
QUESTION: We have watched the Budget and your reply very, very closely. Why is the Newstart allowance, an increase, not an ALP commitment? 
QUESTION: Would you look at changing it so that it, the annual indexation is similar to what happens with the pension?
QUESTION: It makes a lot of people very sad... 
QUESTION: Substantially, I mean I know you can't commit but it needs a good hike... 
QUESTION: Who do you imagine is on Newstart when you picture it in your mind's eye? 
QUESTION: We've been asking our listeners over the last couple of weeks about trust in regard to politicians and in particular who they trust more, you or Scott Morrison. 22 per cent of our listeners who took part in our survey said they didn't trust either of you. Do you accept that voters are switching off? 
QUESTION: Bill Shorten just a final question for you talking about town halls, we read today that you have agreed with the Prime Minister Scott Morrison to a debate here in Perth on the April 29. Can you tell us what the arrangement of that is. Will it be a town hall-style debate? Will it be a more formal debate? Will there be questions from the audience or limited journos? 
QUESTION: Thank you very much for your time. 
QUESTION: Look, this is the first time we've spoken to you since the election was called. The first Newspoll of the campaign has you well ahead of Scott Morrison: 52-48 two party preferred. Based on that, it would be a landslide to Labor. Is this your election to lose?
QUESTION: All right. While we've got you Bill Shorten, the children of notorious terrorist Khaled Sharrouf have pleaded to be allowed to come back home to Australia after years living in Islamic State territory. Their grandma told Four Corners program on the ABC last night they pose no threat to Australia. If you were Prime Minister, would you let them back in?
QUESTION: But you'd like them back in?
QUESTION: Yep. All right Bill Shorten, thanks for joining us. 
QUESTION: This new Medicare item number that Labor is proposing, why would a doctor accept a fee that's lower than what they can currently receive with the Medicare rebate they get plus the out-of-pocket they can get from a patient?
QUESTION: In regards to hospitals funding, Mr Shorten, will you commit to restoring federal funding for hospitals to a 50-50 split with the states, even if that ratio, 50 per cent, is more than $2.8 billion?
QUESTION: You say that the cancer plan is about boosting competition, but haven't you given the impression to voters that all cancer treatment will be free if you're elected?
QUESTION: The Government tells us, right or wrong, that funding for this local area health network is up 89 per cent on 2012-13. Now that figure might be wrong, I can't vouch for that. Can you tell us, is the funding is up almost 90 per cent and if so, haven't you just walked into an example of actually pretty good government commitment to health?
QUESTION: Is health spending here at record levels, Mr Shorten, or is it not? It is a simple question - it is or it isn't?
QUESTION: Is it at record levels or not?
QUESTION: You keep dodging the question by not answering it, so is it at record levels or not. Because this is one of the confounding issues over the election campaign over whether you say there is more money on education or health or whether the Government says there is record levels on education and health. Simply, is it at record levels or not?
QUESTION: What consultations or procedures would be covered under this new Medicare item number? Is it all cancers or just certain cancers?
QUESTION: Are you worried about Malcolm Turnbull giving support to independents?
QUESTION: On the question of independents, are you prepared to seek assurances of supply and confidence if necessary after the election?
QUESTION: What if you don't form a majority...
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Josh Wilson has said that Israeli checkpoints are places where people go to die. Julian Hill and Cathy O’Toole have made similar criticisms of checkpoints. Sue Lines has attacked the Israeli lobby in a speech, and Andrew Leigh once wrote that Australia needs to stop Israel going down a self-destructive path. Are you out of line with your MPs on increasing support for Israel? For Palestine, sorry.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, this morning you talked about lifting wages for people down at Spotswood. What do you say to small businesses who are going to pay extra to their staff? Are you telling them that they'll have to absorb the costs of passing on higher wages to their workers?
QUESTION: Clive Palmer has agreed to pay back Queensland Nickel...
QUESTION: Does that make him more of a threat in the Senate?
QUESTION: Can I ask you about your fuel efficiency policy. Do you rule out exempting vehicles that sell less than 2,500 units from the policy?
QUESTION: On the fuel efficiency policy do you rule out that exemption for low-selling vehicles?
QUESTION: Vehicles that sell 2,500 or less.
QUESTION: The Climate Change Authority which your policy is based on...
QUESTION: Well, a lot are them are quite expensive cars, low-selling cars, are they going to be exempt under the policy?
QUESTION: Do you have concerns about the Government asking the Health Department to cost your policies?
QUESTION: Malc … Scott Morrison has nominated...
QUESTION: ... April 29 or 30 for the Perth leadership debate. Will you accept either of those dates?
QUESTION: On Peter Dutton, Labor have been running a hard campaign here in Victoria. Is he an electoral asset for you?
QUESTION: What did Melissa Parke say wrong?
QUESTION: She said her views were very well known for many years, why was she preselected in the first place?
QUESTION: Which views don't you agree with?
QUESTION: Did the party ask her to stand down?
QUESTION: But this isn’t about her views, it’s about an unfounded claim about Israeli soldiers. Isn’t that a bit more serious?
QUESTION: You have called her a fine foreign policy thinker and internationalist in a tribute to her. Do you stand by that assessment today and, if you do, shouldn't a Shorten Government at least factor in her views on the Palestinians?
QUESTION: [inaudible]
QUESTION: She made claims that she saw a pregnant woman forced to drink bleach at the Gaza crossing. Now either that didn't happen and she shouldn't have said it, or it did happen and you should agree with it and say it was the right thing to say.
QUESTION: I'll take you to a different matter, Alex Turnbull has said on Twitter that he's trying to roll climate change deniers within the Liberal Party. Do you think that party does have climate change deniers, and what do you make of Alex Turnbull?
QUESTION: What were you hoping to achieve in your meeting with Anthony Pratt.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Liberal Party has lost three candidates because of section 44 concerns. Can you guarantee there are no such concerns for any Labor candidates?
QUESTION: You said Newstart will rise under a Labor Government. Do you envision that being a small, modest or large increase and when would welfare recipients start to see that increase?
QUESTION: Franking credits and this electorate of Robertson. This electorate has plenty of retirees, many whom might be affected by your policy on franking credits. What is your message to them?
QUESTION: When will the Newstart review start, finish and the increase go into people's bank balances.
QUESTION: ACOSS says $75 would be an appropriate increase to Newstart. What do you think of that figure?
QUESTION: Peter Dutton is doubling down on his attacks on Ali France. What is your response to that?
QUESTION: Senator, do you think an apology would suffice? Should they go further?
QUESTION: On the Easter weekend it appears that GetUp is going to be campaigning during the Easter long weekend. Do you think it is appropriate, given that GetUp is an independent organisation as you say, is it appropriate though?
QUESTION: Can we go back to Melissa Parke for a second. I know you said it was her decision to step down so as not to be a distraction but is there not room within the Labor Party for differing views on a major issue like this?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, it's been reported that you had lunch with [Anthony] Pratt, yesterday, Australia's richest man. Can I ask, did you make any assurances that you'll be looking after the top end of town?
QUESTION: Should the children of ISIS fighters be brought home to Australia?
QUESTION: Can I ask a question about Adani. Do you absolutely rule out revisiting the groundwater management plan in government?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten what do you make of Peter Dutton’s comments about Labor’s candidate in Dickson? Do you think he’s being deliberately provocative in suggesting that she’s using her disability as an excuse?
QUESTION: Yes a question on cancer research spending. Mr Shorten you’re here with Brian Owler. In 2014 Brian Owler, speaking to health fund bosses, it’s reported said “seven per cent of procedures that were covered by health funds incurred out of pocket costs. So how many services incur this out of pocket cost? How bad is that problem of out of pocket costs? And do you expect Brian Owler to come into the Parliament for the Member of Bennelong given the swing that we saw at the by-election?
QUESTION: Just one question on that same speech...
QUESTION: Doctor Owler, just on that same speech, you're reported as saying, "we know that people will happily pay for cosmetic procedures but feel affronted if there's any cost associated with their cancer care." It appears that you took aim with people complaining about high medical gap care costs. Have you changed your mind on that sense?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can I ask you about Israel Folau?
QUESTION: Thanks, Ali France and Peter Dutton - what's your response?
QUESTION: In regards to Israel Folau - and I appreciate many people will be repulsed by his comments, he has an implied right to practise a religion. He has an implied right to preach that religion. Why doesn't he have a right to put that on social media?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the government's released what it says is Treasury modelling, putting the cost of your tax measures and non-measures at $387 billion. What do you say the true figure is? And how do you explain the discrepancy, if there is one?
QUESTION: What do you say the total impact is then? Is it 387 or is it different?
QUESTION: Clearly, the Labor Party is going to collect far more revenue than the government does over the next four years, over the next ten years. Clearly that's part of your plan. Doesn't that not have some sort of economic impact which will affect ordinary people?
QUESTION: On the accountant’s exemption, Mr. Shorten - the tax commissioner last month said he was sceptical that most of the savings claimed weren't from managing tax affairs but were in fact from other deductions, are you 100 per cent confident that you will raise the $1.8 billion over the next decade that Labor wants to from closing this loophole?
QUESTION: But Mr Shorten -  But Mr Shorten I- 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Scott Morrison has accepted a challenge to debate you in Perth, I understand. One, could you give us a direct answer to the challenge to have a debate in Perth, two, more broadly could you tell us how many debates do you think we should have in this campaign, and what kind of conditions would you apply to the way they are conducted, where they're conducted, and when we'd see them? 
QUESTION: On treasury being used to cost Labor policies while the government is in government, and then those numbers subsequently being released during the caretaker period, is that something that Labor sees a problem with?
QUESTION: Yeah, just quickly: Are you at all concerned about the Real Estate Institute's active campaign to lose Labor votes in marginal seats over negative gearing?
QUESTION: But they say - its going to create more instability in housing.
QUESTION: It's one of your big ticket policies - can you tell us clearly what is the breakdown between new and existing properties and negative gearing? We haven't got a clear answer on that question. 
QUESTION: Can I just ask about Julian Assange - should Australia be doing anything to stop his extradition to the United States, and what's your general reaction on his arrest? 
QUESTION: ACOSS said they want to ramp up Newstart, you say we need it lifted - I know you're going to review it once you ‘re into government, but can you guarantee it'll remain the same level?
QUESTION: So, on just what you said about Newstart then, are you suggesting that either way, whatever comes out of the review there will be some kind of increase of some sort?
QUESTION: Bill Shorten is campaigning in Sydney this morning where he will reveal the latest details of the party's plans to cut cancer costs. He joins us from the Sydney Markets. Mr Shorten good morning to you.
QUESTION: Firstly, to the news of the morning, what is your response to the arrest of Julian Assange overnight?
QUESTION: What do you make of America confirming overnight that yes indeed it does want to extradite Julian Assange to the United States?
QUESTION: Should the Australian Government, any Australian Government, Coalition or Labor seek to stop such move?
QUESTION: You're campaigning in Western Sydney this morning, Bill Shorten, how worried are you about the prospects of the Labor Party not just in Western Sydney but in Sydney generally after the disastrous performance of state Labor in the recent NSW election?
QUESTION: The Prime Minister on the show half an hour ago released the Treasury costings pointing to $387 billion burden as the Coalition puts it of the Labor tax plan over the next decade. Can voters afford to elect the Labor Party?
QUESTION: It’s not the Government, it’s the Treasury figures. Are you saying the Treasury is lying? They are very similar to figures put out by Chris Bowen the Shadow Treasurer a few days ago.
QUESTION: To another tax concession Labor is promising to wind back to some degree, negative gearing. The NAB has put out a report this week saying it expects house prices in Sydney to drop by 20 per cent before this fall is over from the peak in 2017. Does it give you any pause for thought regarding the winding back of negative gearing concessions?
QUESTION: Just about out of time so confirming there will be no change at all if you win government to the negative gearing plan? 
QUESTION: But no change to your future plan?
QUESTION: Just wanted to confirm that. The CFMEU is asking all Queenslanders to sign a pledge to support the coal industry. Should they sign that? 
QUESTION: Should the Labor MP's sign the pledge? Based on what you said?
QUESTION: Is the CFMEU bullying your Labor colleagues in Queensland?
QUESTION: I'm not talking about them, I am talking about the CFMEU. I am asking the question? Do you believe that union is bullying your QLD Labor colleagues?
QUESTION: We will have to leave it there, Bill Shorten thank you very much.
QUESTION: Hopefully many times over the course of the campaign.
QUESTION: Well, you are promising to make life easier for Australians, but new treasury costings which the Government has released show you'll hit households with $387 billion in extra taxes over the next decade. Do you really think voters will welcome paying $5,400 a year more in taxes under Labor than the Coalition? It is a potent argument.
QUESTION: Do you deny that these costings from Treasury are correct?
QUESTION: So no validity at all, you won't be taxing more -
QUESTION: A lot of retirees though, many of them who are on modest nest eggs are not millionaires, they’re worried about your changes to the franking credits. A lot of people who have got investment properties, a lot of them are not millionaires, are confused and concerned about your crack-down on negative gearing and capital gains tax. Will you be reviewing any of these policies, particularly the property ones in light of the fact we have seen the housing market really go downhill since you released that policy?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've arrived at a seat with a margin of 6.4 per cent, that suggests that you see yourself as a clear front runner, is that how you see it? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will this family be affected by Labor's negative gearing policy?
QUESTION: It was reported today…
QUESTION: It was reported today that Queensland MPs were gagged from talking to the media about Adani, would you pledge to enable them to have a full and frank debate about the mine?
QUESTION: Exactly where in the Richmond seat will this radiation centre be?
QUESTION: While this will help access for a lot of people, there will still be some people left in the lurch and some of the biggest costs are the travel costs for regional patients, is Labor going to do anything about that?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten in regards to the fish kill report do you think the Government's response will be enough to prevent a future fish kill?
QUESTION: Yesterday your shadow Attorney General said Peter Dutton has some questions to answer over cash for access meetings with Mr Huang. Do you have any questions to answer about your own $55,000 paid meeting with the same Chinese donor in 2015. Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
QUESTION: Did you discuss the China Australia Free trade deal?
QUESTION: What about your meeting though, what was discussed there, what commitments were made? 
QUESTION: Is it hypocritical to be criticising Peter Dutton given your own links? 
QUESTION: Why aren't you marching in the Change the Rules rallies today? 
QUESTION: If you were in Melbourne would you be marching alongside (inaudible)?
QUESTION: You have set a target of 50 per cent of new car sales being electric by 2030. Have you set a target for how many of them to be built in Australia?
QUESTION: You sort of touched on it before but does Labor then have plans to offer millions of dollars to these automotive giants to help resurrect the car industry.
QUESTION: Will there be a target for how many of those are built in Australia? 
QUESTION: This airport business case, how will this work, and what will we see happen with that?
QUESTION: Rocky's been an international airport for over twenty years, and Kirsten Livermore has been here, and so was Marjorie Henzell and they never did nothing it's been in their time it was an international airport, it's been an international airport for probably over twenty years. 
QUESTION: What are you doing for North Queensland? 
QUESTION: Bill are you confident in the Environment Minister's approval of Adani? 
QUESTION: On the radiation facility, would that be a public or private facility? 
QUESTION: In the past we've struggled to attract specialists to the Gladstone region, are you confident you can get specialists into those facilities? 
QUESTION: And what are some of the measures as part of the $500 million commitment that will actually reduce waiting times? 
QUESTION: So the Environment Minister has given the green light to Adani. Are you confident of her approval and do you think it stacks up environmentally and financially? 
QUESTION: Will you be seeking to review this decision if you win government?
QUESTION: Michelle Landry this morning said that Labor's Just Transition program shows that the party is trying to destroy the mining community in Central Queensland. What's your response to that?
QUESTION: Mark Butler is quoted in today's Daily Telegraph as saying that the Just Transition Authority is strongly supported by coal miners. How did you find that out? 
QUESTION: It's funny you mentioned the CFMEU. Stephen Smyth has asked if he'd like to know what the members that he represents in places like Moranbah or Middlemount will 'just transition' into. Are there any viable alternatives for coal miners in those communities?
QUESTION: The vehicle emissions standard. When would that apply? Do you think voters should be told when they'd be put in place before the election?
QUESTION: Did you plan on putting that standard in place? 
QUESTION: Peter Dutton said Sam Dastyari has some questions to answer over the revelations on 4 corners last night. Do you think he holds responsibility as well? And do you think the federal integrity commission?
QUESTION: Bill, I'll just take you back to the Transition Authority. Matt Canavan spoke in Mackay this morning and he just wants a full explanation of what it really is.
QUESTION: Do you think it is fair that Fraser Anning has avoided criminal charges over the ‘Egg Boy’ incident?
QUESTION: The man that Dutton is alleged to have met with, Chinese billionaire Huang Xiangmo, have you ever had any dealings or met with him previously?
QUESTION: So you didn’t take any money for your meeting with him?
QUESTION: Well, the bookies are the best bet of how things are going to play out and your odds of winning are better than you'll get with Winx at the track tomorrow.
QUESTION: Alright, Bill Shorten, we thank you for your time this morning. There's five weeks of this. We look forward to chatting to you during the course of the campaign. Thanks again.
QUESTION: Now, the man who wants the top job, Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, is also in the Emerald City. He joins us now from the Sydney Markets at Homebush. Bill Shorten, good morning to you. You kicked off your pitch to voters yesterday in enemy territory, in the safe Liberal seat of Deakin. You must be very confident that you've got this election in the can?
QUESTION: But now to other news, a bit closer to home and Bill Shorten is promising to fund $200 million worth of free blood tests for cancer patients and older Australians on day six of the federal election campaign. The Opposition Leader has already pledged to invest $2.3 billion to fight cancer. Yesterday announced a quarter of a billion dollars to free up waiting times in public hospitals. But questions have been raised over Shorten's costing as he denies it's been massively underfunded.
QUESTION: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten joins us now from Melbourne. Good morning to you. Now you've promised to invest $2.3 billion to slash out-of-pocket costs for cancer patients. The Coalition says it's an irresponsible hoax that will actually cost billions more than you say it's going to. What do you say to that?
QUESTION: Earlier today, we spoke to the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. What is your response to claims a Shorten Government would be the highest taxing government in Australian history?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will you match the increase to the offset to $1,000? I know you're on $920 at the moment but will you then extend that to $1,000?
QUESTION: The government claims that your energy policy will effectively devastate Australian jobs. What modelling, if any, do you have which can be delivered to reassure the public that that is not the case?
QUESTION: I've just got one back on the offsets, if I may. It sounds like the Coalition wants to get those tax offsets through Parliament this week before it breaks ahead of the election. Will Labor work with the Government to make that happen?
QUESTION: Just on the surplus, please. Do you not consider this a mark of good economic management that we are back in the black and will you offer bigger and better surpluses? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, tomorrow's the Budget - there'll be about $15 billion or thereabouts in fuel excise in there, with EVs, they obviously don't use fuel, are you happy to see the take from the fuel excise go down or will Labor consider some sort road usage charge in the future?
QUESTION: (inaudible)
QUESTION: Why not ban petrol vehicles then, the NRMAs are calling for that today, there are lots of European countries have done it, the NRMA wants it as soon as 2025. Why not just take that step and really drive the change?
QUESTION: The cost of that change Mr Shorten, now we have the final, I guess it's the final component of your climate policy. What is the total cost to the economy, what's the impact on GDP growth. What will the impact be on electricity prices. What will the impost be on business? Four parts.
QUESTION: Thanks Bill, well what's become increasingly clear here and around the world is that the old link between emissions growth and GDP growth has been broken by a whole range of technological innovations. The most authoritative modelling of the two emissions reduction targets, ours of 45 percent which was based on advice from the Climate Change Authority and Tony Abbott's of 26 was conducted for then Prime Minister Abbott himself and what that modelling showed from Warwick McKibbin, he said that under both targets over the course of the 2020s' real GDP growth will be around 23 percent. If anything energy costs under our target will be lower because there'll be much bigger drive into energy efficiency and there'll be a substantial positive impact on job creating investment under our policy as well. 
QUESTION: The 250 big business polluters that you expecting to have to buy carbon credits, how many of those credits are you expecting that they will have to buy and how much would that cost?
QUESTION: There's a new impact though - 
QUESTION: But can’t you say before the election what the impact will be on steel makers and aluminium smelters in Australia? Why can't you say before the election what will happen to them?
QUESTION: By a lot more though - 
QUESTION: You want to reduce emissions by 45 per cent or by - 
QUESTION: So what does it mean for a steel - what does it mean for the steel maker? 
QUESTION: That's a guarantee? We will still have existing steel and aluminium makers in Australia?
QUESTION: Can I ask, with the electric vehicles, logic tells you that would put pressure on baseload power in this country (inaudible). Do you have any discernible idea of what that may be and whether or not you will need a fair more amount of coal in the future?
QUESTION: (Inaudible) carbon credits for Kazakhstan. What controls, quality control do you have over those international (inaudible)?
QUESTION: On the vehicle emission standards, you're going to put the onus on car dealers rather than the manufacturers to meet them. How will that sort of work in practicality? Will it be a case of dealers having to keep paperwork and if I'm going to go and buy a Land Cruiser, will the dealer tell me no, I've got to sell you a Prius because of government regulation? And secondly, Mr Shorten on tax - on the budget. If the Government wants to get its tax cuts through Parliament this week, will you support that?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the reason we don't have a vehicle standard in Australia at the moment is in part because powerful interest groups have prevented one from being implemented for the best part of 15 years. Your policy is not clear about when the new vehicle emission standard is set to take effect. Also you are in terms of industrial pollution you're saying you've got a 45 per cent emissions reduction target but you're going to consult with businesses about their baselines and trajectories. Agriculture is out of these curves all together, can Labor guarantee that you'll be able to deliver a 45 per cent economy wide drop in emissions by 2030 given that your own policy is heavily caveated at this point. And also, ahead of the election, would you as the Government has done, release a carbon budget so that Australians are aware what level of abatement you are factoring in in each sector of the economy. The Government has done it, will Labor do it?
QUESTION: Will you produce meaningful numbers then?
QUESTION: Actually that was covered off on that question but actually on the land sector, so there's no target for agriculture? You don't know anything about the compliance for companies under the safeguard mechanism so how are you going to drive the purchase of abatement from the carbon and land sector?
QUESTION: Is it fair that farmers have to pay for the rehabilitation of that land in those clearing laws you mentioned?
QUESTION: But the question is whether it's fair that the farmers have to be responsible for that or whether the Government should subsidise them to clear their land.
QUESTION: Has Labor done any modelling on the impact of this policy on the price of vehicles and particularly the price of Australia's two most popular vehicles the Ford Ranger and the Toyota HiLux? And has there been any modelling also on the availability of vehicles? Will people be able to buy the vehicles they want at the price they're currently paying?
QUESTION: Under your plan will Australia be able to recycle all of it's recyclable material and not send it offshore?
QUESTION: So you think you can deal with all of our recycling waste in Australia by doing what you’re doing?
QUESTION: The European Union's just voted to ban all single use plastics by 2021, so going further than what you're announcing things like earbuds, straws, that type of product. Why not follow the European Union, if they can do it why can't we?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, when will voters get details on your climate change policy? 
QUESTION: What about Kyoto carry over credits (inaudible) can you say much on that? 
QUESTION: The government is today announcing one off payments for concession card holders to help with rising power prices (inaudible)?
QUESTION: Federal Labor said that if elected it wishes to put a woman into the role of Governor General. How that has any, or what impact on Mr Hurley?
QUESTION: What impact will that have on Mr Hurley?
QUESTION: Even if she's not as good?
QUESTION: To take you back to this the container deposit scheme when would you envisage that being introduced and would you be modelling it on say, South Australia's how would that work?
QUESTION: Would you expect those states to have the national container deposit scheme? We're working on the basis that it's opt-in and on an opt-in basis we want to make sure that we get over that initial challenge, that we have, which as I say is where if you're trying to set up a business to do the actual recycling not just to do the collection then everything at the moment is prepared to a different grade.
QUESTION: So how do you convince states like Victoria who have so far resisted a container deposit scheme. What do you have to do to get them over the line?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Chris Bowen said that if elected a major economic statement would come out in the third quarter. What do you have to say to this?
QUESTION: It's not far away is Labor really ready for it though?
QUESTION: What are your thoughts on Eddie McGuire's comments yesterday about Cynthia Banham?
QUESTION: Can I ask another recycling question, sorry you've broken a record here. Obviously the industry particularly in Melbourne hasn't had a great run in the last few years with some fairly devastating fires. How do you ensure that the industry, if it's to grow, grows in a way that isn't going to put the community at risk?
QUESTION: On a final separate note if I can. There are advocates on the steps of Parliament today to advocate for victims of sexual abuse who want change to the National Redress Scheme. How is Labor moving towards that, would it support such an indication?
QUESTION: What would be the first thing on our agenda if you were elected on this matter?
QUESTION: Truck drivers are protesting across the country today, what would Labor do to help reduce the truck (inaudible)?
QUESTION: You began your day with a visit to the Al Noor Mosque, one of the two mosques targeted in the attack, you left a floral tribute as you know, thousands of people have done throughout the past fortnight. What did it mean to visit that site this morning where dozens of innocent worshippers were killed?
QUESTION: Just finally the New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has earned widespread praise from across the globe for the way she responded, her leadership, the way she comforted the family members of the victims in the day after the attack. You were there at the service, you saw the way that New Zealanders responded to Jacinda Ardern's presence, the standing ovation. How have you found the way that the Kiwi Prime Minister has handled the aftermath of this tragedy?
QUESTION: You talked a lot about Australian tradies - there's a lot of international tradies here getting a qualification but they say they can't work, as they can't get apprenticeships afterwards. Are we doing enough for these people who come into our country to learn a trade and fill a gap in the skill shortage?
QUESTION: Can you guarantee that no one in Labor has ever offered to influence Australia's laws while speaking to a lobbyist about political donations?
QUESTION: Just on that, Labor has announced that they'll be preferencing One Nation last on how to vote cards, will you also be telling One Nation not to preference you above the Coalition in Queensland?
QUESTION: What do you say to Pauline Hanson's conspiracy theory that Port Arthur was a conspiracy to deprive Australians of their guns?
QUESTION: If One Nation are that bad why should a government accept their vote in the Senate? A Coalition or a Labor Government for that matter?
QUESTION: But is there a moral question there? If they're not good enough to be worthy of any support in an election setting but morally can a government accept their vote once parliament is sitting?
QUESTION: There have been times when the ACTU and I think sometimes possibly activist groups have said put the LNP last. They certainly did that in Queensland in Longman. It's a very simple message obviously but it doesn't mean putting One Nation last. Would you be disappointed if the unions used that language now? Put the LNP last?
QUESTION: George Christensen spent a lot of time outside the country, more time in the Philippines I think than he spent in parliament he concerned about his overseas trips?
QUESTION: Will Labor be seeking to strengthen Australia's gun laws?
QUESTION: What do you make of reports this week that Scott Morrison in 2014 proposed getting $9 billion for internment camps for people overstaying their visas and that sort of thing. Is that something that you think the Prime Minister of Australia should be promoting?
QUESTION: You've got the Budget next week do you expect to see income tax cuts in that Budget and what would a fair budget look like for you?
QUESTION: Should Morrison -
QUESTION: Would Labor support another round of income tax cuts, so do you think that there's any justification for them?
QUESTION: Labor wants to boost super contributions to 12 percent. Is it a good idea considering that wage growth has stagnated?
QUESTION: What are your thoughts on the move by the PM to plunge $500 million on NDIS providers ahead of the Budget? The ABC understands that it will happen on Friday or Saturday.
QUESTION: Will Labor offer financial incentives to energy companies that slash their greenhouse gas emissions?
QUESTION: Could I put a question to Jennifer about Michael Daly's comments. I don't know whether you've commented about what Michael Daley was recorded to have said in New South Wales. I realise it's another State but does that cause any grief for you here in Victoria? Does it influence people's opinions of Labor and what's your response to what Michael Daley said?
QUESTION: Bill Shorten, 97 per cent of employers in this country are small and medium size. How can you be confident that this policy of lifting the minimum wage won't hurt their viability?
QUESTION: While the corporate profits are up further the endless question for some of those smaller businesses you know maybe their profits aren't going up by 45 per cent so the issues of what they can afford would be real. In your changes to the law would the Fair Work Commission still take into account the state of the economy, the profitability of small businesses or other businesses so the sustainability of the increase would actually be a factor?
QUESTION: Just one more for you sorry, Mr Shorten. Do you regret calling employers "fat cats" because you would know many of whom were offended by the comment?
QUESTION: On a living wage policy, how would it affect the business like Tooheys that is actually owned by a multinational?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten are you satisfied with the Coalition’s response to the One Nation-NRA story that's around today. Should they be added to the Fraser Anning censure motion? 
QUESTION: What Michael Daley said about Asian-Australians, do you think those are appropriate comments for a Labor leader? 
QUESTION: But will the comments do damage federally in the election? 
QUESTION: Did you pressure him to stand down?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the One Nation video - it was more than just touting for money, it was what they were going to do with it, which was to undermine - seemingly - the electoral process?
QUESTION: There was a ban on foreign donations that went through the Parliament. There’s always debate about further changes to donations law and maybe the One Nation video does highlight that. Would a Labor Government make any further changes to the way elections are funded, the way the donations laws work now?
QUESTION: Should One Nation be censured along with Fraser Anning?
QUESTION: Should Steve Dickson stand aside, he is the lead Senate candidate for Queensland.
QUESTION: The government says that minimum wage increases have outstripped CPI increases so who’s right, you or them?
QUESTION: Do you want the cloud of a leadership challenge or a leadership vote hanging over Labor during the entire federal campaign?
QUESTION: There will still be people counting numbers and things like that though?
QUESTION: Just on social media companies, a push to have them face tougher penalties if they don't do the right thing. Do you think that is a good idea?
QUESTION: Would a Labor Government legislate criminal sanctions against the social media companies in the way that the Morrison Government is canvassing?
QUESTION: Is this a carbon copy of the Mediscare campaign you ran in 2016 election?
QUESTION: Are there are - sorry - are there any circumstances in which a Shorten Government would reintroduce a rebate freeze down the track?
QUESTION: How can you assure Australians of this though given that Labor introduced the rebate or the rebate freeze when it was last in power?
QUESTION: So will you guarantee that you won't introduce a rebate freeze?
QUESTION: I've got another question. So the government signalled it will spend half a billion dollars on health before the election - will Labor match that?
QUESTION: How do you fancy your chances here in Higgins?
QUESTION: So how confident are you that you can win the seat?
QUESTION: Sorry  - how confident are you that you can win this seat? Thanks.
QUESTION: Just quickly why did you drop Josh Spiegel?
QUESTION: Bill can I ask you, how important will Victoria be then to the next federal election?
QUESTION: Just turning to New South Wales, do you think Michael Daley should step down now and how worried are you about a leadership challenge in New South Wales ahead of the federal election?
QUESTION: Okay we're weeks away from the federal election, why don't you say when negative gearing changes will be introduced?
QUESTION: Is that result in New South Wales a wakeup call though for Labor and are you worried about seats like Lindsay?
QUESTION: When will you confirm your final position on using Kyoto credits towards a Paris climate target?
QUESTION: Could I just ask you a question? Why didn't you get the swings then to you that you got in the Victorian election and what do you make of that result in New South Wales?
QUESTION: If I could just ask once about taxes please? There's talk of tax cuts in the federal budget. How big do tax cuts need to be for it to be worthwhile to most Australians?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, you've given some interviews in recent days where you've spoken about what sort Prime Minister you'd hope to be. Is that clear indication that you believe that you will win the election?
QUESTION: There is a $3 billion contingent liability in the budget at the moment for East-West Link. Would you -
QUESTION: Are you going to use that money to fund any of this work or will that be spent on something else? 
QUESTION: Just to be clear, if you're the Federal Infrastructure Minister post the Federal election, what would you do with that money? Would you -
QUESTION: How does a result in New South Wales effect your campaign over the next 6 weeks?
QUESTION: But after being buoyed from the Victorian results, is this pretty average result for Labor in New South Wales a wakeup call?
QUESTION: Bill, Michael Daley's comments about Asians very damaging there in the last week. Does that leave your party with a lasting problem in that state?
QUESTION: Do you regret not being on the ground more in New South Wales? Do you personally regret not being on the ground in -
QUESTION: But why didn't you campaign more with Michael Daley? 
QUESTION: What do you think Mark Latham will bring to the New South Wales Parliament? Do you think he will be a valuable addition there?
QUESTION: Would you like to see Michael Daley continue as the Labor Leader in New South Wales?
QUESTION: Before we get back on to this project to the Premier, do you support the crackdown on the tech-giants, Bill? Or do you -
QUESTION: The Treasurer knocked down a plan this week to increase taxes on the tech giants. I think it was a new digital tax that they were looking at. Is that something you'd be open to?
QUESTION: Are fines or convictions the answer in your mind, or do we need to have a discussion first?
QUESTION: Premier, real quick just back on this big spend. I know there's no final cost but how will we be paying our share?
QUESTION: I'm just making sure that it would come out of the budget, not be fronted up by a private company and then we've got to pay for it 10 years -
QUESTION: What would you say are the main deficiencies in the current system when it comes to irrigation?
QUESTION: Is there an expectation that Tasmania will take on a greater portion of the nation's agriculture in the coming years due to extreme weather events on the mainland that don't effect Tasmania as much?
QUESTION: The Turkish President has again played the Christchurch shooting video. How can you believe that he was misquoted, as he said, when he is continuing to play this video? 
QUESTION: The Christchurch shooter was active on social media platforms in far right groups for quite a while before the terrorist attack. How could have this gone unnoticed by Australia's intelligence agencies (inaudible)?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, great see you in Tasmania but why aren't you in New South Wales helping Labor's campaign?
QUESTION: Do you feel your presences wouldn't help Labor there? Do you feel you presence detracts from Labor - 
QUESTION: Labor MPs in New South Wales have admitted that they have had a poor week of campaigning. Can Michael Daley recover, do you believe? 
QUESTION: Do you see this state election as a test run for the federal election?
QUESTION: On climate change, why is it taking Labor so long to say if it will use carbon carry-over credits?
QUESTION: On the AFL, the state Government is starting a taskforce to lobby for a Tas-AFL team. Labor has already made a funding commitment of seed funding. The $25 million that you've committed, would that be available for the AFL (inaudible) or a specific condition attached to how that is used?
QUESTION: So could some of that money from Labor be used to upgrade the Bellerive oval?
QUESTION: Is it time the AFL gave Tasmania a clear answer (inaudible)? Should they stop stringing Tasmania along? 
QUESTION: Just on the Banking Royal Commission, do you support the Government's plan to create a new division in the federal court system to include criminal prosecutions for the sector?
QUESTION: Could I have one more on AFL?
QUESTION: If you're elected at the federal election, would Federal Labor be  willing to work with the Tasmanian Liberal state government in a bipartisan way to get up an AFL team?
QUESTION: Can I bring you back, one more question, to today's announcement. What are you offering that the Liberal Morrison Government hasn't already offered?
QUESTION: Is it not king of expected they would given they funded the first two? 
QUESTION: It's a question for Fiona. How long have you been a member of the Labor Party and why Labor?
QUESTION: Who is that, sorry?
QUESTION: Labor got less than 15 per cent of the primary vote in Higgins three years ago. What has changed so dramatically that you think you could actually win? 
QUESTION: When it comes to how to vote cards will you be putting One Nation last on all of those cards?
QUESTION: Your candidate has just said that climate change is an existential threat. Why is Labor still considering using a so called accounting trick to meet its emissions targets?
QUESTION: Scott Morrison says Sally McManus has been attending Shadow Cabinet meetings. I think Sally has denied that online what's the truth and would that be appropriate?
QUESTION: What do you make of Scott Morrison's $2 billion dollar announcement to build a high speed rail between Melbourne and Geelong? Good idea, will Labor match it?
QUESTION: So  you've got two though, high speed rails are now being discussed for Melbourne one to Geelong one all the way up to Brisbane. Which of these if any will Labor commit to?
QUESTION: Do you think Pauline Hanson is a racist?
QUESTION: What do you think about Michael McCormack urging now people to put the Greens last?
QUESTION: Just on IFM Investors, is a bonus of $26 million there abouts okay?
QUESTION: Why don't we know? Shouldn't industry funds disclose what their executives are getting given the ethos and criticism of CEO bonuses (inaudible)?
QUESTION: Will you be swapping preferences with the Greens in this seat?
QUESTION: Can I just get one for Fiona?
QUESTION: You mentioned that you were disappointed about the Coalition’s response to the voice statement, do you agree with the idea of having a representative body for Indigenous people?
QUESTION: Fiona do you live in the seat of Higgins?
QUESTION: Where do you live?
QUESTION: If you are elected then that gives you three years or so to move here, so will you commit to moving here if you are elected then?
QUESTION: That's not a commitment though is it?
QUESTION: Do you see that as a disadvantage? I mean people often like to look to a local candidate who's been living in the community and understands local issues. 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, are these initiatives all affordable, fully funded or - we're clearly in campaign mode mode now, so cross crossing the country dropping millions here and there, is there a danger this election campaign will send Australia broke?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten and Premier McGowan, can I ask as part of your joint-cabinet meeting, was there any questions raised about the EPA decision earlier in the week and were there any definitions sorted about what Labor's emissions policy would be going forward and what would be responsible? 
QUESTION: Should Australia move back its ambassador from Ankara?
QUESTION: DFAT is reviewing travel (inaudible) would it be a shame if Australians are forced to cancel travel to ANZAC Day at Gallipoli?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Chamber of Commerce has put out some research on the potential impact of your government, a future government endorsing the ACTU’s living wage and the adverse impact on jobs, and related to that, there's also been a lot of concern about your closeness to some of the militant maritime and construction unions. What can you say about the concerns of people in the business community about wage increases and your relationship with unions?
QUESTION: Will you be sticking to the 160,000 migration cap for the next four years if you are elected? 
QUESTION: So do you think that migrants should be incentivised to move into the regions though?
QUESTION: Who is leading the cost of flying the entire Shadow Cabinet into Perth this week?
QUESTION: So that's taxpayers?
QUESTION: But does it take every Shadow Minister, isn't Bill Shorten enough to make all those announcements?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten what are the chances of having a West Australian in your Cabinet? 
QUESTION: Premier can you put a cost value on Chris Hemsworth’s video travelling the state and was it worth the price tag of his holiday?
QUESTION: So how soon do you expect a return, when should tourism numbers to WA be increasing, becasue they've been stagnant.
QUESTION: When - is there a deadline? Would you expect to see vast improvement in 12 months, 24 months, before the state election?
QUESTION: Are you spending money here?
QUESTION: Premier one of your members floated the idea of lowering the blood alcohol limit for drivers from 0.05 to zero, a flat zero. Is that discussion - is it time to have that discussion yet?
QUESTION: The limit at the moment, do you see it as effective and safe?
QUESTION: It's going to be the up to the State Government (inaudible)
QUESTION: Is there any double up? Would it cancel out the future batteries then that you are trying to get funding for?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten the Prime Minister has condemned comments by Michael Daley in a video that surfaced online. What do you make of the comments, and will you do the same?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, Mr McGowan can I ask you both would you support greater regulation of social media such as Facebook and Twitter, to deal with the promotion of hate speech and political extremist messages?
QUESTION: Premier, have you formally asked [inaudible] and if they refuse to go, what will you do?
QUESTION: So how will you stop people going in there, tourists or others?
QUESTION: [inaudible]
QUESTION: What do you think of Fraser Anning's egging yesterday?
QUESTION: I've got two questions - two topics to cover (inaudible). 
QUESTION: (inaudible)
QUESTION: Thank you.
QUESTION: In terms of Facebook, what responsibility do you think social media giants like that have to stop broadcasting material like this?
QUESTION: What part does the Government have to play in assisting someone like Facebook then?
QUESTION: And a further question on Fraser Anning please, do more politicians need to rethink the language they use in relation to refugees and migration?
QUESTION: Yes, so Mr Shorten given your stated support for a living wage does Labor support the ACTU claim for a $43 a week increase in the minimum wage?
QUESTION: Can you explain in simple terms how wages would be higher under Labor?
QUESTION: You said you would change legislation to set the minimum wage, would that legislation enable you to direct the Fair Work Commission?
QUESTION: (inaudible)?
QUESTION: Does the Fair Work Commission remain the independent umpire if the guidelines have been tweaked by the Coalition Government?
QUESTION: So you are satisfied with the capacity of Fair Work to set wage rises?
QUESTION: So back to changing those guidelines then what would that like? Would the Fair Work Commission still retain that independence?
QUESTION: But how, what would it look like, how would you change it?
QUESTION: Just on energy, Labor has pledged an economy-wide 45 per cent emissions cut, but cuts are easier to make in energy. Will you rule out a higher emissions target on energy than 45 per cent to allow lower targets in transport and agriculture?
QUESTION: But do you rule out a 45 per cent target for transport and agriculture?
QUESTION: The workers here at Woolies are on an EBA not the minimum wage. What would you do to boost their wages?
QUESTION: Just back on energy, I've asked you this before and you said you were consulting. Is there any update on if Labor does win the election, will it be using carbon credits from Kyoto Protocol?
QUESTION: Any time frame on that?
QUESTION: It is rapidly approaching. 
QUESTION: Just finally, do you agree with Michael Daley saying that students should be allowed to skip school for those climate change rallies? 
QUESTION: Sorry, I just wanted to ask you about children caught up in the Syria -
QUESTION: And if their parents are foreign fighters. What do you think should happen to them should? Shouldn't they be allowed back in Australia?
QUESTION: So do you think the children should be allowed to return to Australia?
QUESTION: The Federal Government's locked away $3 billion dollars in funding for the east-west link. If you win government, what would you like to see done with that money and have you spoken to Dan Andrews about it?
QUESTION: Do they throw the $3 billion to the Metro Tunnel?
QUESTION: Jason O'Mara, the head of the CFMMEU in Canberra has had his house shot at while he and his family was inside. What -
QUESTION: Just quickly, will you be attending the Dick Pratt funding dinner?
QUESTION: Dick Pratt - 
QUESTION: We haven't even seen a business case for stage two Light Rail yet. Why are you giving this money now?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, will you legislate to change the Fair Work Act to ensure that the minimum wage can be lifted?
QUESTION: Just further on Eryk’s question and a related question. You say that you want to get a Fair Work Commission guidance on how they come about the minimum wage. Does that require legislation, legislative change? And secondly, I want to ask about your bigger, better tax cuts that you talked about yesterday. You say that you're going to deliver that for eight, nine million people. Is that on top of everything that Labor's already promised or is it something that we're going to hear in your Budget Reply?
QUESTION: You've already done that -
QUESTION: I was asking about new tax offsets -
QUESTION: Mr Shorten -
QUESTION: Just further on the Fair Work Commission. Can you explain why you would trust the Fair Work Commission on minimum wage but not on penalty rates? And secondly, is there a link between the minimum wage and employment participation?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten -
QUESTION: The link between the minimum wage and employment if it gets too high, does that drive up unemployment?
QUESTION: Malcolm Turnbull says the Liberals have a problem with women and cultural issues as well. How much is he helping you right now?
QUESTION: Angus Taylor,  Angus Taylor has - 
QUESTION: Thank you.
QUESTION: Scott Morrison has rejected calling the Chief Minister to include ACT Police under the new Integrity Commission. If you were elected would you commit to changing the Self Governing Act so that could happen or could you commit to having ACT Police come under your Federal ICAC?
QUESTION: Angus Taylor has 66 firm power generation proposals on his desk for potential underwriting. What will the Shorten Government do with that list? Will you consider underwriting any of those projects and secondly do you accept that the Fair Work Act 2009 is the guidelines and the rulebook for the Fair Work Commission in determining the minimum wage and what you would hope would be a living wage.
QUESTION: But the act says that increased workforce participation, the needs of the low paid, various economic considerations are all part of the decision but it does not place primacy on any of those factors. Will Labor ask or will Labor legislate to give primacy to the needs of the low paid?
QUESTION: What number would you put on a living wage?
QUESTION: Do you agree with the unions, 60 per cent?
QUESTION: So the Liberals have put a lot of obstacles between the light rail and the parliamentary approvals processes, <inaudible>, would you do anything to smooth the process through so a light rail stage two can happen?
QUESTION: With Labor's response to the Banking Royal Commission, why have you ruled out changes around mortgage brokers? And with the Disability Royal Commission, why do think it is taking so long to get terms of reference?
QUESTION: The unions 60 per cent of the medium wage, they say that's what a living wage is. Do you agree with that?
QUESTION: On Light Rail, will your contribution be capped at $200 million or will it go up potentially resulting on what the business case says?
QUESTION: Just on emissions, Mr Shorten. Have you made a call yet on Kyoto carry-over credits which reduce your actual target from 45 to around 34?
QUESTION: Hang on, hang on. 
QUESTION: On the Liberals and Nationals struggling with renewables (inaudible) communities in regional Australia and do you (inaudible). Are you worried about Labor's position in terms of inner-city seats and regional Australia? And on Kyoto credits, would you guarantee to make your position clear before the election? 
QUESTION: (inaudible) Because this question from David Speers is critical. If you do accept carbon credit carry-over, then your target goes from 45 to 34. Nations including New Zealand, Germany, Iceland, others say that they aren't going to use the carry-over. Wouldn't you be wimping it if you didn’t accept - if you did accept the carry-over?
QUESTION: (inaudible)
QUESTION: This has been your target for some years now.
QUESTION: Will you apply that 45 per cent to the transport sector and the agricultural sector? 
QUESTION: But how do you get, how do you get to 45 per cent -
QUESTION: - 45 per cent across the board?
QUESTION: What is your policy though?
QUESTION: It’s a press conference Mr Shorten.
QUESTION: $200 million on something that the first stage, we don't even know if it is viable? We don't even know whether it's a dud or not?
QUESTION: There’s division in the Nationals around coal, do you think energy could be factor in yet another leadership crisis?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the Paris agreement is economy wide, not just the electricity sector. Are you signalling here that your 45 per cent may not be economy wide?
QUESTION: Do you want a small increment Mr Shorten? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten an issue that some Queensland MPs are talking a lot about is coal-fired generation. Barnaby Joyce says the Liberals and Nationals aren't married on this issue, should the public be concerned about the split there? 
QUESTION: When should the public find out whether the Government would invest in new coal-fired generation, do you think it should be before the election that the public should know that? 
QUESTION: (inaudible) phase out coal fired power station under your plan to increase emissions targets?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten the Budget is coming up, they're talking about the government may well need something to really get their selves going - (inaudible) change in the polling, change in the opinions after the Budget?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten there seems to be some confusion about whether Labor will count the Kyoto credits towards your emissions reduction targets (inaudible). 
QUESTION: When will you announce your policy on that?
QUESTION: So what is the cheapest source of power; coal or renewables?
QUESTION: When you're Prime Minister, will you stop the building of any more - any more coal fired power stations?
QUESTION: Will there be (inaudible)?
QUESTION: There is a proposal to scrap the election eve ban on TV campaign advertising. Do you think the ban is outdated?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, just to ask you about the latest polls. Are you ready to be Prime Minister? 
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, how is your offer any different to what's already been put up?
QUESTION: Just specific though, you mentioned there, you just said there that you're matching what's already been offered. But you said they've done 'zip'? So if you're saying you are matching how does that work?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten have you perhaps missed a chance to trump the LNP and pledge (inaudible)?
QUESTION: (inaudible) in the Queensland Government to put up their share?
QUESTION: Bill, there are some pretty big plans for the light rail future extensions. Would a Labor Government's support further extensions to say, the airport, the Spit, that kind of thing?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, the state Liberal Government seems underwhelmed by your generosity put for South Road, saying well A, it's not ready to get yet, it's not shovel ready so the money would essentially have to be put in a holding account, and B, you're too late to the table anyway.
QUESTION: Just on Sturt - 
QUESTION: What's the point though in locking up money in a project the State Government says is not ready to go yet, when you could put money toward other projects in Adelaide?
QUESTION: Is this a bad sign you know, if you were to become Prime Minister you have to deal with a State Liberal Government that doesn't want to play ball. Are you worried about how that relationship will go?
QUESTION: Surely you're viewing Sturt - or Labor winning Sturt as you know, it would be a bonus and almost your entire resources are going to go into Boothby. Is it fair to assume? 
QUESTION: Nominations for the Liberal Party preselection in Sturt close today. There have been a number of moderates in that party talking about wanting a woman to run for Sturt. Are we in a situation where the moderates are saying - the Liberal Party is saying we want a woman but we won't vote for one?
QUESTION: Mr Turnbull may have been speaking the truth though, it might be dead right that the right in the Party fear that he could sneak over the line in the next election and with the greatest respect be stuck with him for three years.
QUESTION: Mr Shorten just on talking about former Prime Ministers, what do you make of Tony Abbott's backflip this morning about withdrawing from the Paris Agreement? 
QUESTION: The government says that your figures on the North-South corridor are a little bit off and it'll cost about $5 billion. What do you say to that, do you have the figures right?
QUESTION: Will that leave the job half done?
QUESTION: But what does that costing look like, is it a widening, bridges, tunnels, what exactly?
QUESTION: The state is talking about one option being tunnelled, the whole thing at once, in one gigantic project rather than breaking it into bits, and it has been held back. 
QUESTION: You mentioned local procurement being a goal for this project, do you have a minimum percentage of locals working on it?
QUESTION: But Penny Wong, you want a minimum percentage on the subs project, shouldn't that apply here as well?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, can I just ask Labor's announcement this week to tie hospital funding to the provision of abortion services, was that discussed or signed off by your leadership group?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, once upon a time being Opposition Leader in this country was considered one of the hardest jobs.
QUESTION: Right now in the political climate, is this one of the easiest?
QUESTION: Just briefly on climate change -
QUESTION: Just very quickly. Sarah Hanson-Young is going to be out this afternoon, she's going to say that if Labor is serious about climate change they would come out and say that exploration in the Bight should be banned. What would you say to that?
QUESTION: I just wanted to ask Cressida, do you -
QUESTION: Oh sorry.
QUESTION: Do you think you can win Sturt or (inaudible)?
QUESTION: Do you think your chances in Sturt are enhanced if they stand a man, if the Liberals preselect a man? 
QUESTION: It's looking in all likelihood that James Stephens given the moderates controlling that branch, that he'll stand. Do you feel as are your chances to win are enhanced by coming up against a man? 
QUESTION: In terms of climate change, that's obviously a big national issue, I mean what are the people in the eastern suburbs saying about climate change?
QUESTION: And just to confirm you live within the electorate as well?
QUESTION: Mr Shorten, very last question on Malcolm Turnbull, well two actually.
QUESTION: Do you think he would have beaten you?
QUESTION: And I've still got the second question. Given his supposed I guess, disloyalty you might say, towards the party overnight, he might be angling for a diplomatic post under a Shorten Government. Would you consider that? 
QUESTION: On the living wage, the ACTU has previously said they’d like to see 60 per cent of the national median wage, so the living wage is pegged to that - is that something you would like to see or have you got a different policy? 
QUESTION: Will you announce a wages policy before the election. If so, when?
QUESTION: On Christmas Island, have you been briefed on how it's going to work on the Medevac -
QUESTION: You're making the call that $18.60 isn't enough, but then you won't say what is enough to make a living.
QUESTION: On energy policy, six Nationals MPs are demanding action from Michael McCormack to put the government's energy policy back on the agenda. What do you make of this in-fighting?
QUESTION: If there's a vote on this issue in Budget week, what are the changes you would like to see?
QUESTION: Can Labor unseat Ministers like Greg Hunt and Josh Frydenberg?
QUESTION: Do you think there could be a repeat of the state results federally here in Victoria?.
QUESTION: The Greens are threatening to launch the biggest protests Australia's ever seen if the Morrison Government signs off on two new coal-fired power plants in New South Wales. What do you make of the plan?
QUESTION: Why have you decided today to come to a State Government funded project to announce what you want to do as Prime Minister, if you were elected?
QUESTION: How is Labor going to address the concerns of Chinese Australians after Michael Daley's remarks in the New South Wales election campaign?
QUESTION: Hi Bill, how are you going?
QUESTION: Before we get into the detail of it, if I could start a bit generally on the economy. I think we’ve seen in the last few days competing economic narratives. Both yourself and the Prime Minister coming at it from different angles. I had a conversation about a year ago with Kevin Rudd, your predecessor times two, and he said one of the difficulties a Labor Opposition always faces close to an election is a reluctance amongst voters to hand the economy to Labor, especially a recovering one or a strong one. He encountered that problem in 2007, and he said that's why he had to make those answers about being an economic conservative and so forth. He said it's always - the polls would always close on you just because of that inherent reluctance. How do you, mindful of what you've just told us, how do you sort of combat that sentiment? We heard yesterday the Prime Minister waving the recession word around, leaving that hanging, obviously trying to reinforce that negative perception. How do you get around that?
QUESTION: I was going to ask you about it, because the Prime Minister made the point yesterday, his line is you have to grow the economy to pay for all these things, health and so forth, all the issues that you hold dear. What's your basic plan for growing the economy? Is it this inclusive growth strategy that Labor has or something a bit more basic?
QUESTION: Could I ask you about that - on wages, because there was a bit of interest in this room. One of the criticisms of business is the money has to come from somewhere. You talked about the minimum wage being inadequate, not a living wage. Is a living wage still on the table as part of Labor policy and also you didn't mention in terms of things you would do, the reintroduction of industry wide bargaining in low paid sectors which came up in Labor's National Conference last year. Are those two ideas still potential Labor policy position?
QUESTION: So we could be looking at a living wage?
QUESTION: Okay, we've only got a minute to go, so I'll take that as it’s on the table. 
QUESTION: No that's okay. Just very quickly, two things of interest to our audience. You've outlined your carbon emissions policy for the energy sector, you’ve flagged a baseline and credit scheme for heavy manufacturing (inaudible) will we see the details of that before the election?
QUESTION: Just also all your tax changes, negative gearing, CGT, franking credits etc. The election timing is going to be very tight in terms of the start of next financial year, should you win the election there'd be a fairly quick turnaround to try to get the Parliament back and actually legislate anything.
QUESTION: That's what I'm wondering. 
QUESTION: So investors will know the start dates of those policies?
QUESTION: Okay thanks Bill.