
Troy-Bilt Electric Leaf Blowers Recalled by MTD Due to Laceration Hazard. The blower's impeller can break and strike the operator during use.
DeWALT Recalls Cordless Drills due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), DEWALT Industrial Tool Company, of Towson, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 346,000 DEWALT Cordless Drills. The trigger switch of the cordless drill can overheat, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Robertshaw Controls Company Announce Recall of Certain Models of 7000 Series Gas Control Valves. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Robertshaw Controls Company of Long Beach, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about 425,000 gas control valves. They may pose a fire hazard. If the pilot light goes out, the gas valve could stick in an open position, permitting gas to continue to flow. This can result in a gas explosion and fire, which could result in severe personal injury or property damage.
Polaris Recalls Snowmobiles Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). The steering pitman arm or drag link can crack and result in a loss of steering, posing a crash hazard.
CPSC, Fleetwood EXIM Inc. Announce Recall of Cigarette Lighters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Fleetwood EXIM Inc. of Grenada, Miss., is voluntarily recalling about 950,000 disposable cigarette lighters. The lighters have child-resistant mechanisms that do not work. Young children could ignite the lighters, presenting fire and burn hazards.
CPSC, Controlled Energy Corporation Announce Recall of Water Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Controlled Energy Corporation (CEC), of Waitsfield, Vt., is recalling about 320 AquaStar natural gas water heaters. The heaters can produce dangerous levels of carbon monoxide in the exhaust gas, which can cause serious injuries and death.
Ross Stores Recalls Bistro Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. The chair's seat can fail to stay attached to the frame and the chair can collapse.
CPSC, Nashbar Direct Announce Recall Bicycle Resistance Trainers for Repair. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Nashbar Direct, of Canfield, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 2,500 2006 Nashbar Bicycle Trainers. The base of the trainer has a blocking mechanism that can break causing the bicycle to disengage from the stand, posing a fall hazard.
Big Ideas Marketing Recalls to Repair Horse-on-a-Stick Toys Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Big Ideas Marketing, of Owings Mills, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 8,800 Horse-on-a-Stick Toys. The reins on horse-on-a-stick toy's bridle are long enough to form a loop around a child's head and neck, posing a strangulation hazard to young children.
Suffocation, Entrapment Risks Prompt Recall of PeaPod Travel Tents by KidCo. Babies and young children can get trapped in the tent and suffocate. Nine children have gotten trapped or been in distress inside the tent.
Twin Go Recalls Baby Carriers Due to Fall Hazard. The waist buckle can break.
CPSC, Kellogg Company Announce Recall of Toy Cars Inside Boxes of Cereal. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kellogg Company, of Battle Creek, Mich., is recalling 837,000 toy cars, that were packed inside some Kellogg's cereal boxes. The tires can detach from the wheels of these cars, posing a choking hazard for young children.
Tech Gear 5.7 Recalls Performance Heated Socks Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. The lithium-ion battery can overheat, melt or ignite when charged with a charger other than the one provided with the product, posing fire and burn hazards to the user.
CPSC, Mintek Digital Inc. Announce Recall of Portable DVD Player Batteries. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Mintek Digital Inc. of Anaheim, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 116,000 portable DVD player battery packs. The battery can overheat and explode while recharging, posing a burn and fire hazard to consumers.
The Land of Nod Recalls Bed Frames Due to Entrapment Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, The Land of Nod, of Morton Grove, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 1,600 Blake bed frames. A child's torso can become lodged in the gap between the footboard's top rail and the mattress, posing an entrapment hazard to the child.
CPSC, Evenflo Announce Recall to Repair Home Décor Swing™ Wooden Baby Gates. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Evenflo Company Inc., of Vandalia, Ohio, is recalling about 20,500 Home DΘcor Swing wooden baby gates. The plastic mounting hardware that attaches to the wall can crack or break, allowing the wooden gate to unlatch. Children can then gain access to restricted areas, such as stairs. Also, the plastic hardware attached to the side of the gate can break, creating small parts that pose a choking hazard to young children.
Outdoor Vacuums with Honda Engines Recalled By Billy Goat Industries Inc. Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Billy Goat Industries Inc, of Lee's Summit, Mo., is voluntarily recalling about 1,600 Billy Goat MultiVac Outdoor Vacuums. The vacuum's fuel tank could crack and leak fuel. If gasoline leaking from the fuel tank is ignited, a fire or explosion can occur. This poses a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
Aqua-Leisure Recalls Children's Trampolines Due to Fall Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Toys "R" Us Stores. Handlebars on the child-size trampolines can break, posing a risk of fall or laceration from sharp metal.
Rinnai Recalls Wall Furnaces Due to Carbon Monoxide Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rinnai America Corp., of Peachtree City, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 52,000 Direct-Vent Wall Furnaces, Models RHFE 431 and RHFE 556. A gasket in the unit can fail, posing a risk of poisonous carbon monoxide gas leaking into the home.
Flying Tiger Copenhagen Recalls Wooden Toys Due to Choking Hazard. Parts of the wooden toy blocks and giraffes can become detached, resulting in small pieces that can pose a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC and The Coleman Co. Announce Recall of Gas Grills. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Coleman Co. of Witchita, Kan., is voluntarily recalling about 86,000 Coleman Gas grills. A sharp edge on the metal heat shield below the control panel of the grill can cause lacerations to the hands, wrists or arms.
Hayes Company Inc. Recalls Outdoor Candles Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Hayes Company Inc., of Valley Center, Kan., is voluntarily recalling about 83,000 "Avant Yarde" Decorative Glaze Outdoor Candles. The candle's wax can catch fire causing a high flame, which poses a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
Currie Technologies Recalls Adult Tricycles Due to Fall Hazard. The rear axle on eZip and iZip Tricruiser tricycles can break causing a wheel to detach. This poses a fall risk to riders.
All Power Portable Generators Recalled by J.D. North America Due to Explosion, Fire and Burn Hazards. The fuel tank can leak.
Gaming System Batteries and Recharging Station Recalled by LeapFrog Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LeapFrog Enterprises Inc., of Emeryville, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 35,500 Rechargeable Batteries and Recharging Station for Didj Custom Gaming System. The rechargeable batteries included with the Recharging Station can overheat if the gaming system is placed into the recharging base upside down, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Orbea Recalls Avant Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. The bicycle fork can crack, posing a fall hazard to the rider.
Dollar Stop Plus Recalls Extension Cords for Fire, Shock, Electrocution Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dollar Stop Plus, of Chicago, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 40 15-Foot Extension Cords. These extension cords have undersized wiring, and fail to connect properly at the plug and receptacle ends. This poses fire, shock and electrocution hazards to consumers.
Creative Products, Inc. Recalls Lovely Sonny Doll Due To Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Creative Products, Inc., of Skokie, IL, is voluntarily recalling 4,334 "Lovely Sonny" dolls, model number 1079. When CPSC tested the dolls, the arms separated from the arm sockets and a small plastic piece from inside the doll fell out of the socket presenting a potential choking hazard for young children.
CPSC, Kenyon International Inc. Announce Recall of Portable Butane Stoves. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kenyon International Inc. of Clinton, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 3,500 portable butane gas stoves. The unit's safety fuel shut-off system could fail to shut off when the fuel container is overheated. If overheated, the flame from the stove flares up, and cannot be controlled with the adjustment valve, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Kolcraft Announce Recall of "Ranger" Strollers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kolcraft Enterprises Inc., of Chicago, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 25,500 strollers. Lock mechanisms, found on both sides of the stroller, can break and create a pinch-point hazard. Young children can be injured when their fingers, arms or hands are pinched between parts of the locking mechanism.
Frontrow Recalls to Replace Rechargeable Batteries Sold with PA System Microphones Due to Burn Hazard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, in cooperation with Frontrow, of Petaluma, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 41,000 NIMH AA Rechargeable Batteries. The batteries can rapidly overheat, posing a burn hazard to the user.
CPSC, Tecumseh Power Co. Announce Recall to Repair Lawn Tractors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Tecumseh Power Co., of Grafton, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 21,000 Lawn Tractors. The axles on these lawn tractors can crack and break if subject to extreme load amounts. Should the axle break, it could cause a loss of control and result in injuries to the rider.
Coleman Recalls Flashlights Due to Fire Hazard. The lithium-ion batteries can overheat.
Air Pistols That Can Fire Unexpectedly Are Recalled by Umarex USA. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Umarex USA Inc., of Fort Smith, Ark., is voluntarily recalling about 7,250 Air Pistols. The air pistols can accidentally discharge, posing a risk of serious injury if the air pistol is loaded and pointed at the user or another person when it discharges.
CPSC, XL Machine Ltd. Announce Recall of Playskool Toy Chests Sold at Target. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), XL Machine Ltd., of Eden Prairie, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 3,300 toy chests. Screws in the chests' lid support hinges can loosen over time, and come out from the base of the toy chests. If this happens, the lids of the toy chests can collapse suddenly, possibly causing injuries to children's head, neck, fingers or hands.
CPSC, FF Acquisition Wheeled Goods Corp. Announce Recall of Go-Karts. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), FF Acquisition Wheeled Goods Corp. of West Point, Miss. is voluntarily recalling about 10,000 Yerf-Dog Go-Karts. The suspension assembly can crack causing the rider to lose control of the go-kart.
Women’s Scarves Recalled by Wrapables Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard (Recall Alert). The women’s scarves fail to meet the federal flammability standard for clothing textiles, posing a risk of burn injuries to consumers.
Dorel Juvenile Group Recalls Safety 1st Stair Gates Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dorel Juvenile Group USA, of Columbus, Ind., is voluntarily recalling 100,000 Safety 1st SmartLight Stair Gates. The hinges that hold the stair gate in place can break, posing a fall hazard to children if the gate is placed at the top of the stairs.
CPSC, GapKids Announce Voluntary Recall of Kids' Anoraks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gap Kids of San Francisco, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 127,800 GapKids spring/summer anoraks, a pull-over hooded nylon windbreaker. The anoraks have paint on the zipper pull that contains an unacceptable level of lead. While exposure to the defective zippers presents no immediate health danger, exposure to high levels of lead over an extended period of time presents a potential poisoning hazard to young children if ingested.
Playskool Baby, Inc. Recalls Hand Holders. Playskool Baby, Inc., a subsidiary of Hasbro, Inc., is voluntarily recalling its Baby Guards Disney Hand Holder No.9560 and its Baby Guards Sesame Street Hand Holder No. 9562. Some of the painted Mickey Mouse and Big Bird characters on the wristbands may contain excess levels of lead and, if ingested, may present a potential lead poisoning hazard.
Product Substitution For Excedrin Announced. Bristol Myers Products, a division of Bristol Myers Company, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) announced today a product substitution of the company's 225 tablet package size and 375 tablet size of Excedrin analgesic tablets which were distributed nationwide prior to April 1977. CPSC testing found same packages for this product failed to comply with Federal regulations requiring that the packages be child-resistant.
CPSC, Scag Power Equipment Announce Recall of Tiger Cub Lawn Tractors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Scag Power Equipment, of Mayville, Wis. is voluntarily recalling about 16,000 Scag Tiger Cub riding lawn tractors. Fuel can leak out of the carburetor, posing a risk of fire and burn injuries.
Safety Vacuum Release System Recalled by Vacless Systems Inc. for a Repair/Replace Program to Prevent Entrapment. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Vacless Systems Inc., of Sylmar, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1,600 Pool Safety Vacuum Release Systems. Improper plastic material found inside the recalled product has been attributed to vacuum release failures which create an entrapment hazard to swimmers and bathers.
Winco Fireworks Recalls Black Cat Cone Fountains Due to Fire Hazard. When ignited, the device can burst and spread sparks and pyrotechnic materials outward instead of upward as intended.
Cranium Cadoo Board Games Recalled Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cranium Inc., of Seattle, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 38,000 Cranium Cadoo Board Games. The surface paint on the die contains excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
LJN "Sling 'Em-Fling 'Em" Wrestling Ring Toy Recalled. LJN Toys, Ltd., New York, NY, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), is recalling its World Wrestling Federation "Sling 'Em- Fling 'Em" wrestling ring toy because of potentially severe injuries should a child fall on one of the corner posts of the wrestling ring. LJN was a subsidiary of MCA, Inc. during the period of manufacture and sale of the wrestling ring. LJN, a publisher, marketer and distributor of home entertainment products, is no longer in the toy business.
CPSC And Chadwick-Miller, Inc., Announce Electric Defroster Recall. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today announced that Chadwick-Miller, Inc., Canton, Massachusetts, has voluntarily stopped sale and distribution and is recalling their electrical refrigerator defrosters.
Magura USA Recalls Bicycle Hydraulic Disc Brakes Due to Collision Hazard. MT 6 and MT 8 models of hydraulic disc brakes can fail in low temperatures.  The were sold at bike retailers and distributors.
Airplane and Butterfly Push Toys Recalled by LS Import Due to Choking Hazard. The wheels of the airplane, and the balls at the tip of the butterfly's antenna can detach.
CPSC, The Gymboree Corp. Announce Recall of Baby Sandals. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Gymboree Corp., of San Francisco, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 5,600 Caroline Flower Baby Sandals. A plastic flower attached to the sandals can pull or snap off, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Brand Imports, LLC Announce Recall of Children's Rings. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Brand Imports LLC, Scottsdale, Ariz., is voluntarily recalling about 1 Million Children's Rings. The rings contain high levels of lead, posing a risk of lead poisoning to young children.
CPSC, John Wiley & Sons Inc. Announce Recall of "Candle and Soap Making For Dummies" Instruction Book. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), John Wiley & Sons Inc., of Hoboken, N.J., is voluntarily recalling 5,400 s"Candle and Soap Making For Dummies" Books. The instructions in the book for making lye combine sodium hydroxide and water in an incorrect order. This could cause the mixture to bubble over, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Duracraft Corporation Voluntarily Modifies Certain 16" Brass And Platinum Plated Fans That May Pose A Safety Hazard. Duracraft Corporation, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), announced the voluntary modification of its Duracraft models DP-161, DP-1601 and DP-1602, fans manufactured before February 1991.
BYA Sports Recalls Skyline Backyard Zipline Kits Due to Fall Hazard. A crimp in the zipline can fail allowing the cable to pull free or become slack while in use, posing a fall hazard to the user.
CPSC, American Standard Companies Announce Recall of Trane and American Standard Accessory Electric Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), American Standard Companies, of Piscataway, N.J., is voluntarily recalling "Trane" and "American Standard" brand accessory electric heaters. Overheating of the wiring in the accessory heater can lead to wall thermostat fires.
Toy Wrestler Figures Recalled by A.A. of America Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), A.A. of America Inc., of East Brunswick, N.J., is voluntarily recalling 5,400 Toy Wrestler Figures. The surface paint contains high levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Kickboard USA Recalls Children's Scooter Due to Laceration Hazard. This recall is for the three-wheeled Mini Micro scooter for children ages 3-5. The plastic platform that covers the front wheel base can break.
The Land of Nod Recalls Plush Dollies Due to Choking Hazard. The hands on the all-fabric dolls can detach.
STIHL Recalls Chain Saws Due to Risk of Injury. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, STIHL Inc., of Virginia Beach, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 MS 391 chain saws. The flywheel on the chain saw can crack causing parts of the flywheel to separate and strike users or bystanders, posing a risk of injury.
Illume Recalls Valentine's Day-Themed Ceramic Mugs Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Target Stores. The mugs were mislabeled as microwave safe. If microwaved, the metallic print on the mug can spark, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Boscov's Department Stores Announce Recall of Christmas Windmills. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Boscov's Department Store Inc., of Reading, Pa., is recalling approximately 19,000 Christmas windmills with candles. The candles are too close to the wooden structure of the windmill, and can cause the product to catch on fire.
Briggs & Stratton Snow Thrower Engines Recalled Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Briggs & Stratton Corp., of Wauwatosa, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 480,000 OHV Snow Thrower Engines. When the engines are primed, excess fuel can overflow into the carburetor and ignite, posing fire and burn hazards to consumers.
Additional Injuries Prompt Reannouncement of Fiskars Recall of Bypass Lopper Shears Due to Laceration Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Home Depot. The lopper handles can break when attempting to cut branches, posing a risk of serious injury and laceration.
Trek Recalls Farley Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. The fork can separate from the steer tube, posing a fall hazard to the rider.
CPSC And Zip Zag Announce Sweat Shirt Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Zip Zag of Hoboken, N.J., is recalling approximately 18,300 women's cotton sweat shirts. The sweat shirts, which violate the federal Flammable Fabrics Act, burn faster than newspaper and pose a serious risk of burn injuries.
CPSC, Kent International and Kash 'N Gold Ltd. Announce Recall of Scooters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kent International Inc., of Parsippany, N.J.; and Kash 'N Gold Ltd., of Ronkonkoma, N.Y., are voluntarily recalling about 97,500 scooters.
Little Tikes Expands Recall of Toy Workshop and Tool Sets Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Little Tikes, of Hudson, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling more than 1.7 million additional Little Tikes Workshop and Tool Sets (about 1.6 million toy workshop sets and trucks with the same toy nails were recalled in August 2009). The recalled workshop and tool sets have oversized, plastic toy nails that can pose a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, UL United Inc. Announce Recall of Electrical Paintings. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), UL United Inc., of Houston, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 150 electrical paintings. The electrical paintings can short circuit, posing a shock or fire hazard.
Wooden Rattle Recalled by Manhattan Group Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Manhattan Group LLC, of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 3,300 (in the United States) and 145 (in Canada) Twirlla™ wooden rattles. The toy's U-shaped parts can break, posing a choking hazard.
DUI Dry Suit AC Valve Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Diving Unlimited International, Inc. (DUI) of San Diego, California is announcing a recall of its AC (air control) dry suit valve because the valve malfunctions.
Tot Tower Blocks Recalled by eeBoo Corp.; Children's Toy Can Pose Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), eeBoo Corp., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 170,000 Tot Tower toy blocks. The plastic covering on the toy blocks can detach, posing a choking hazard to children.
SRAM Recalls Bicycle Brakes Due to Crash and Injury Hazards. A rivet in the brake assembly can loosen or disengage, resulting in brake failure, posing crash and injury hazards to the rider.
Discount School Supply Recalls Double Egg Shakers Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Discount School Supply, of Monterey, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 Double Egg Shakers. Surface paint on the red eggs contains excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Grandin Road Recalls Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. The Alsace Furniture Collection chairs' back legs can bend when a seated person leans back.
CPSC and Walgreens Announce Hand Candle Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), East West Distributing Co. and Walgreens of Deerfield, Ill., is recalling about 95,900 hand-shaped, five finger Decorative Novelty Candles made for Halloween. The hand-shaped wax candles generate high flames that may present a fire hazard.
CPSC and Division Sales Announce Recall of Baby Buzz Infant Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Division Sales Inc. of Chicago, Ill., is recalling over 26,000 Baby Buzz stretch mobiles. The toy presents a risk of strangulation if hung across a crib or playpen. It is not labeled to warn consumers about the risk and not to attach the toy to a crib or playpen.
CPSC, Kent International Inc. Announce Recall of "Midget Racer" Mini-Bicycles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kent International Inc. of Parsippany, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 28,000 "Midget Racer" mini-bicycles. The front fork assembly on these mini-bicycles can loosen or break, and cause the rider to lose control and crash.
CPSC, Calphalon Corp. Announce Recall of Stainless Steel Kettles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Calphalon Corp., Toledo, Ohio, is recalling about 13,000 stainless steel kettles. The kettle's cover traps steam inside of the kettle causing an increase in pressure. This forces hot water to rise and escape through the spout, posing a serious burn hazard to consumers.
Farm Glass & Metal Spiral Tea Light Holder Recalled by Christmas Tree Shops Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Christmas Tree Shops of Union, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 6,200 Farm Glass & Metal spiral tea light holders. Due to the design of the product, the tea lights can burn with a high flame, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Division Sales, Inc. Announce Wooden Toy Truck Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Division Sales Inc., of Itasca, Ill., is recalling 44,000 wooden toy trucks. The truck's driver and wheels can break off, presenting a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Tools Exchange Inc. Announce Recall of Novelty Cigarette Lighters. Novelty Cigarette Lighters - Tools Exchange Inc., of Lynwood, Calif., is recalling about 5,300 novelty cigarette lighters. The lighters have two brand names
Ambler Mountain Works Recalls Children's Knitted Hats Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ambler Mountain Works, of Canmore, Alberta, Canada, is voluntarily recalling about 370 Erwin Beanie and Poseidon Beanie Children's Knitted Hats. The eyeballs on the Erwin Beanie and the octopus legs on the Poseidon Beanie can come loose, posing a potential choking hazard.
CPSC, Honda Announce Recall of All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs). American Honda Motor Co. Inc., of Torrance Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 2003 model year All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs). The recalled ATVs are model number TRX650FA. They are red or olive green, and "Rincon" is written on the side cover with VIN numbers ranging from 478TE280*3A000041 to 478TE280*3A006105. The VIN numbers are located on the left-front frame tube. Honda motorcycle dealers nationwide sold these motorcycles from July 2002 through October 2002 for approximately $7,000. They were manufactured in the USA.
CPSC, CFM Corporation Announce Recall to Repair Vermont Castings Five-Burner Barbeque Grills. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), CFM Corporation, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada  is voluntarily recalling about 12,500 five-burner Vermont Castings barbeque grills. Gas leak and fire hazard. The burner tubes may not fit fully into the gas valves. If a consumer pulls on the console, the metal may flex and the gas valves may disconnect from the burners, releasing gas and creating a fire risk that could cause injury and property damage.
Blenders Recalled by Haier America Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Haier America Trading, L.L.C., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 53,800 Blenders. The blade assemblies of the blenders may come apart or break, posing a laceration risk.
Snowmobiles Recalled by Arctic Cat Due to Fuel Leak and Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). Fuel can leak from the Arctic Cat XF 7000 and ZR 7000 snowmobiles' fuel line assembly, posing a fire hazard to riders.
SCARPA North America Recalls Ski Boots with Tronic System Due to Fall Hazard. The Tronic system, can unexpectedly switch from ski mode to walk mode, not allowing the boot to release from the binding, posing a fall or injury hazard.
CPSC, Cascade Designs, Inc. Announce Recall of Stove Fuel. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cascade Designs Inc., of Seattle Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 8,500 cans of Superfuel Liquid Fuel. A manufacturing defect in the can's seam and an insufficiently applied fuel cap can cause the can to leak fuel posing a fire hazard.
Walgreens Vitamins Recalled by International Vitamin Due to Failure to Meet Child-Resistant Closure Requirement. The multivitamin supplement tablets inside the non child-resistant bottles contain iron, which can cause serious injury or death to young children if multiple tablets are ingested at once.
CPSC, Thane International Announce Recall of Perfect Air Ultra™ Air Purifiers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Thane International Inc., of La Quinta, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 35,000 Perfect Air Ultra Air Purifiers. An overheating capacitor in these air purifiers can cause arcing in a connecting wire which poses the risk of fire.
Toys R Us Recalls Magic Feeding Bottles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Toys R Us of Paramus, NJ is voluntarily recalling approximately 120,000 sets of the toy "Magic Feeding Bottles," model number 330221. The toy bottles may break during use producing small parts that could be an aspiration hazard to young children.
P&M Worm Probes Found Hazardous; Electrocution Risk Cited In CPSC Order To Halt Manufacture And Sale Of Worm Probes. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) has determined that the "WORM GETT'RS," an electric worm probe made by P&M Enterprises of Caldwell, Idaho, presents an electrocution hazard and may no longer be produced or sold.
Ruby's Diner Inc. Recalls Giveaway Yo-Yo Toy for Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Ruby Restaurant Group, doing business as Ruby's Diner Inc., and Ruby's Franchise Systems Inc., of Newport Beach, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 200,000 Light-Up Yo-Yo Toys. The yo-yo can separate and expose small parts. This presents a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Kelty Announce Recall of Speedster Jogging Stroller. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kelty Division of American Recreation Products Inc., of Boulder, Colo. is voluntarily recalling 230 Kelty Speedster Jogging Strollers. Stroller handle-locking clips can unlock during use, causing stroller to collapse.
CPSC, Simplicity Manufacturing Inc., Announce Recall to Repair Lawn Tractors and Riding Mowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Simplicity Manufacturing Inc., of Port Washington, Wis. is voluntarily recalling about 5,900 Lawn Tractors and Riding Mowers. A safety switch under the seat of these lawn tractors and riding mowers is designed to stop the mower blade turning within 5 seconds of the operator leaving the tractor seat. The recalled mowers' blades can continue to turn longer than 5 seconds after the operator leaves the seat, posing a laceration and amputation hazard.
CPSC, InSTEP™ LLC Announce Recall of Jogging Strollers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), InSTEP LLC, of Mendota Heights, Minn., is recalling about 44,000 jogging strollers. The stroller's brake can fail, causing the stroller to unexpectedly roll away resulting in injury to a child.
Novel Laboratories Recalls Zolpidem Tartrate Blister Packs Due to Failure to Meet Child-Resistant Closure Requirement; Risk of Poisoning. The packaging for the prescription drug is not child-resistant as required by the Poison Prevention Packaging Act.
CPSC, Dah Ken Industrial Co., and RST USA Announce Recall of Bicycle Front Suspension Forks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dah Ken Industrial Co. Ltd., of Taiwan, R.O.C., and RST USA, of Aliso Viejo, Calif., are voluntarily recalling about 3,300 bicycle front suspension forks. These forks can break apart, causing the rider to lose control, resulting in serious injury.
Valves On Gas Grills Recalled. Thousands of valves on portable gas grills which may pose a fire hazard are being recalled by their manufacturer, the King Seeley Thermos Company, in Prospect, Heights, Illinois. The recall is being conducted voluntarily in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Krups Recalls Vitamini Juice Extractor, Model Number 290. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), KRUPS North America Inc. of Closter, N.J., is recalling the strainer baskets and lids on about 150,000 model number 290 "VitaMini" vegetable/fruit juice extractors. The strainer baskets on these juice extractors can break while in use, possibly injuring people nearby.
Baja Motorsports Recalls Mini Bikes Due to Fall, Crash Hazard. The front fork can separate from the wheel on Baja MB200 gas-powered mini bikes. This minibike may also be known as WR96, WR200, Baja Heat, Baja Carbon and Mini Baja.
Model Pro1600 Hair Dryers Recalled; Fire Risk Cited. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hartman Products, Hawthorne, CA, is voluntarily recalling approximately 900 model PRO1600 hair dryers sold by Wal-Mart stores between January 1992 and April 1993. Hair dryers sold after April 1993 are not involved.
Rechargeable Battery Packs Sold with MAX Wireless Conference Phones Recalled for Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), ClearOne Communications, of Salt Lake City, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 4,200 Rechargeable Battery Packs. These battery packs can short circuit, causing them to overheat and melt the protective plastic covering, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Homelite Consumer Products Announce Recall to Repair Chain Saws Due to Chain Brake Failure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Homelite Consumer Products Inc., of Anderson, S.C., is voluntarily recalling about 370,000 Homelite Chain Saws. The chain brake can fail to stop the chain on its first application, posing a risk of laceration to consumers.
Heat Guns Containing Asbestos Recalled. A program to repair approximately 20,000 "heat guns" used by model airplane hobbyists is being conducted by the manufacturer, Top Flite Models, Inc., of Chicago, Illinois. The heat guns, which contain asbestos heat shields in the barrel, emit asbestos fibers during use.
CPSC, Graco Children's Products Announce Recall of Travel Lite™ Swings. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Graco Children's Products, of Exton, Pa. is voluntarily recalling 140,000 Travel Lite swings. The swing's carrying handle can fail to stay in place properly and drop or be pushed down, hitting a child in the head. Additionally, the 3-point seatbelt can fail to prevent a child from leaning forward or to either side, posing a risk that the child can fall forward and strike his/her head on the floor or the swing's frame.
CPSC, BRIO® Corporation and Small World Toys Announce Recall of Snail Pull Toy. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BRIO® Corp., of Germantown, Wis., a subsidiary of BRIO AB of Sweden, and Small World Toys of Culver City, Calif., are voluntarily recalling about 3,000 Plan Toys pull-along snails. The eyes on the pull toy can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Lifetone Technology Recalls Bedside Fire Alarm and Clocks Due to Failure to Fully Alert Consumers to a Fire. The bedside fire alarm and clock can fail to operate and fully alert consumers to a fire.
Big Fireworks Recalls Mock Sword Fireworks Devices Due to Impact, Burn Hazards. The handheld fountain firework device is intended to emit sparks, but can unexpectedly explode. This poses a risk of impact and burn to the user.
Cannondale Recalls Scalpel Mountain Bikes; Frame Failure Poses Crash Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cannondale Bicycle Corporation, of Bethel, Conn., is voluntarily recalling 150 Cannondale 2008 model year ΓÇ£ScalpelΓÇ¥ mountain bikes. The frame can break while in use, causing the rider to lose control and suffer injuries from a fall or collision.
Goodman Company Recalls Packaged Terminal Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps Due to Burn and Fire Hazards. The outdoor fan motors can overheat, posing burn and fire hazards.
Sony Expands Recall of VAIO Laptop Computer Battery Packs Due to Burn and Fire Hazards (Recall Alert). The lithium-ion battery packs can overheat, posing burn and fire hazards.
Melville Direct Recalls Fiber Optic Christmas Trees Due to Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). The AC power adapter can overheat, posing a fire hazard.
Boys' Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by Scope Apparel Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Scope Apparel L.P., of Houston, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 72,000 Boys' hooded sweatshirts. The garments have a drawstring through the hood which can pose a strangulation hazard to children. In February 1996, CPSC issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled on the neck and waist by drawstrings in upper garments, such as jackets and sweatshirts.
CPSC, Goodman Manufacturing Co. Announce Changes to 1998 Recall Program to Replace Dangerous Home Heating Vent Pipes. The CPSC and Goodman Manufacturing Company, of Houston, TX, are urging consumers who have not yet responded to the previously-announced 1998 recall to do so immediately. After October 1, 2009, the remedy consumers receive will change to be identical to modifications recently announced for a related recall.
Ceiling Fans Recalled by Westinghouse Lighting Due to Shock and Fire Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Westinghouse Lighting Corp., of Philadelphia, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 ceiling fans. The two 60-watt light bulbs included with the ceiling fans exceed the fan's maximum wattage, which can cause the ceiling fans to overheat or fail. This poses fire and shock hazards to consumers.
eheat Recalls Envi Wall Heaters Due to Overheating and Burn Hazard (Recall Alert). Improper wire crimping by the manufacturer can cause the unit to overheat, smoke, or melt, posing a burn hazard.
Toy Cars Recalled. Two models of a toy car which may pose a choking hazard to young children are being voluntarily recalled by Li Peng Enterprises, Inc., of Los Angeles, Cal., in an agreement reached with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission.
CPSC, American Greetings Corp. Announce Recall of Crazy Bounce Balls. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), American Greetings Corp., of Cleveland, Ohio is voluntarily recalling about 17,000 DesignWare Crazy Bounce Balls. The balls could break apart, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Central Fireplace Recalls Fireplaces Due to Laceration Hazard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, in cooperation with Central Fireplace, of Greenbush, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 760 Direct Vent Gas Fireplaces. Excess gas can accumulate in the firebox if the pilot light is not lit or has gone out. When consumers relight the pilot light, the accumulated gas can ignite with force and shatter the glass fireplace doors posing a serious laceration hazard.
CPSC, Sanitoy Announce Recall Of "Rolling Ball Rattle-Teether". In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sanitoy Inc. of Fitchburg, Mass., is voluntarily recalling 21,200 Rolling Ball Rattle Teethers, Model No. 520-Z and Model No. 520-E. The rattle handle may present a choking hazard for young children.
CPSC Announces Final Ban On Lead-Containing Paint. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) has culminated a major regulatory proceeding by issuing a final ban on lead-containing paint and on toys and furniture coated with such paint. This action was taken to reduce the risk of lead poisoning in children who may ingest paint chips or peelings.
Television Wall Mounts Recalled by Milestone AV Technologies Due to Injury Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Milestone AV Technologies LLC, of Savage, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 131,000 Flat screen television wall mounts. The elbow joint components on the wall mount's arm do not fit together properly, causing the attached television to tilt and possibly fall when the television is adjusted. This could pose an injury hazard to a consumer.
Log Swings Recalled by Far East Brokers and Consultants Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Far East Brokers and Consultants Inc., of Jacksonville, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 750 Log Swings. A missing nail connecting the back of the log chair to the seat can cause the back to separate from the seat while in use, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Fitness Balls Recalled by EB Brands Due to Fall Hazard; New Assembly Instructions Provided. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), EB Brands, of Yonkers, New York, is voluntarily recalling about 3 million Bally Total Fitness, Everlast, Valeo and Body Fit Fitness Balls. An overinflated fitness ball can unexpectedly burst while in use, causing the user to fall to the floor.
Bassinets Recalled by Kolcraft Due to Fall Hazard. The bassinet latches that attach the base to the frame can appear to be locked when they are unlocked. The bassinet can detach, fall and injure baby.
Aerosol String Streamers Recalled For Propellant Flammability. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) announced today the voluntary recall of five different brands of aerosol string streamers. These products, used like confetti at birthday parties and other gatherings, are hazardous if sprayed near an open flame, due to the flammability of the propellant used with the products.
CPSC, McDonald's Announce Recall of "Scooter Bug" Happy Meal Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), McDonald's Corp., Oakbrook, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 234,000 "Scooter Bug" toys. The toys were distributed with McDonald's Happy Meals for children under 3 years of age. The bug's antenna can break off, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC Warns of Potential For Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Involving Blueray "BLUE FLAME" Furnaces And Boilers. In voluntary cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Blueray Systems, Inc., of Schuylkill Haven, Pennsylvania, has initiated a program to alert oil heat service technicians, oil heat distributors and home owners of the importance of strict service and maintenance of the Blueray "blue flame" furnace or boiler. A total of nearly 21,000 of such furnaces and 14,500 boilers were produced between 1974 and 1983.
Target Recall Children's Frog Masks Due to Suffocation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Target Corp., of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 3,400 Children's Frog Masks. The plush frog masks lack proper ventilation. When secured in place across a child's face, it presents a suffocation hazard to the child.
STIHL Inc. Recalls Chain Saws Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, STIHL Incorporated of Virginia Beach, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 5,000 Chain Saws. The throttle trigger may stick after it has been released by the operator, which could cause the engine to continue to run at a speed that drives the saw chain. This can pose a risk of a laceration injury to the user or a bystander.
Hoppe's Recalls Semi-Auto Bore Cleaner Due to Failure to Meet Child-Resistant Closure Requirement. Bottles have a child-resistant cap that can become loose. Chemicals in this  product can cause skin irritation, internal injury or death if ingested.
CPSC, Central Sprinkler Recall Omega Fire Sprinklers; Settle Lawsuit. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Central Sprinkler announced today the nationwide recall of approximately 8.4 million Omega brand fire sprinklers manufactured since 1982 by Central Sprinkler Corp. and its subsidiary, Central Sprinkler Co., of Lansdale, Pa. CPSC alleges that Omegas are defective and could likely fail in a fire. This recall announcement follows the resolution of the lawsuit filed by the Commission staff against these companies on March 3, 1998.
Honeywell International Recalls Vista Security System Control Panels Due to Failure of Panic Feature. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Honeywell International Inc., of Melville, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 ΓÇ£Vista ResidentialΓÇ¥ Security System Control Panels. Security systems programmed with a wireless silent panic feature can fail to operate properly the first time the panic button is pressed on the remote transmitter. If the panic button is pressed only once, this can unexpectedly leave residents without a triggered alarm during an emergency.
CPSC Warns of Strangulation Hazard with All Our Kids Portable Cribs/Playpens. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is warning consumers that about 13,000 portable cribs/playpens sold under the brand name All Our Kids pose a strangulation hazard to young children. The playpens, also known as travelyards or playards, have rotating top rails, which can collapse unexpectedly, trapping a child at the neck in the "V" formed by the collapsed top rail.
CPSC, Rio Brands Announce Recall of Folding Lawn Chairs Sold at Wal-Mart. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rio Brands, of Philadelphia, Pa. is voluntarily recalling about 20,700 Mainstays Garden folding lawn chairs. The chair arms can break, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Optave Inc. Recalls Action Baby Carriers Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Optave Inc., of Alpena, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 250 Action Baby Carriers. The baby carrier's chest strap can detach from the shoulder straps, posing a fall hazard to the baby.
Guidecraft Inc. Recalls Children’s Puppet Theaters Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Guidecraft Inc., of Englewood, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 5,400 Tabletop Puppet Theaters. Surface paints on the puppet theater's wooden panels contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Children's Metal Jewelry Recalled by Future Industries Due to Lead Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Future Industries, of Cliffwood Beach, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 20,000 Essentials for Kids Jewelry Sets. The recalled metal jewelry sets contain high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Baby Jogger LLC Recalls Baby Jogger Jump Seats Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Baby Jogger LLC, of Richmond, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 1,545 (in the United States) and 450 (in Canada) Baby Jogger Jump Seats. If the Jump Seat does not properly lock into place, the Jump Seat could disengage from the stroller allowing the child to fall out.
Axis Arrows Recalled by Easton Due to Injury Hazard. The arrows, used for target archery and bow hunting, can break when fired and hit the user and others nearby.
West Elm Recalls Dover Dining Table Due to Injury Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, West Elm, a division of Williams-Sonoma, Inc., of San Francisco, is voluntarily recalling about 830 (in the United States) and 10 (in Canada) Dover Dining Tables. The wooden base of the table can collapse, causing the glass table top to fall. This poses an injury hazard to consumers.
CPSC and Toy-O-Rama Announce Stuffed Animal Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety  Commission (CPSC), Toy-O-Rama of Rolling Hills Estates, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 33,000 stuffed dogs, mice, bears, and rabbits with plastic eyes that come apart from the animals. Young children can choke or inhale into their lungs small parts such as the small plastic eyes.
TCC Cooking Company Recalls CHEFS Vertical Roasters Due to Burn and Laceration Hazards. The CHEFS vertical roasters can break or shatter.
Ammonia Recalled by OnLine Packaging Due to Chemical Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), OnLine Packaging Inc., of Plover, Wis., is voluntarily recalling 75 bottles of Food Club Supreme Clean Clear Ammonia. The bottle, which is labeled as containing ammonia, actually contains household bleach. The mislabeling of the bottles can pose a chemical hazard to consumers. If bleach is accidentally mixed with ammonia or acid, irritating or toxic gases could be produced.
Sherwin-Williams Recalls Dupli-Color Automotive Paint Due to Fire Hazard. The aerosol canisters can leak. Leaking canisters stored near an ignition source can pose a fire hazard.
CPSC, Guess? Inc. Announce Recall of Reverse Fleece Women's Jackets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commision (CPSC), Guess? Inc. of Los Angeles, Calif., is recalling about 2,300 Guess Jeans Women's Jackets. The reverse fleece jackets failed the federal mandatory standards for fabric flammability. These jackets could ignite easily and present a serious risk of burn injuries in violation of the federal Flammable Fabrics Act. Fabrics that do not comply with the standard typically burn faster than newspaper.
Delair Group, Inc. Offers Replacement Parts For Certain "A" Frame Pool Ladders. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Delair Group, Inc. of Delair, NJ, is announcing a repair program of their 52 inch "A" frame pool ladders, model numbers X4932-01 and X4932-06. When pressure is applied to the handrails of the ladder, the handrails can bend outward creating a gap between the handrail and side plate. This gap allows room for fingers or hands to become caught and injured.
Madewell Expands Recall of Women's Sandals Due to Fall Hazard. The metal shank in Madewell Katya model sandals can dislodge and break through bottom of the outsole.
Carlson Cradle Swings. Citing a possible suffocation risk, Carlson Children's Products, Oswego, IL, is voluntarily offering to replace the hanger frame portion of its "Swing 'N Cradle" and "Swivel 'N Snooze" cradle swings. This action is being taken in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).
Snow Peak Recalls Japanese Axe Due to Laceration and Impact Hazards. The handle of the axe can crack, allowing the axe head to come loose, posing a laceration or impact hazard to the user or bystanders.
CPSC, Tim Hortons Announce Recall of Travel Mugs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Tim Hortons of Oakville, Ontario, Canada, is voluntarily recalling about 6,500 travel mugs distributed in the United States. The lids on some of the mugs can detach allowing hot liquid to leak, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
CPSC, TV Guard Inc. Announce Recall to Repair TV Guards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), TV Guard Inc., of Manalapan, N.J., is recalling to repair about 70,000 TV Guards, a plastic shield that attaches to a television to cover control buttons. Children can tip the television over onto themselves by pulling on the TV Guard, and sustain bodily injury.
The Holmes Group Recalls Oil-Filled Electric Heaters Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Holmes Group, of Milford, Mass., is voluntarily recalling about 300,000 Holmes® Oil-Filled Electric Heaters. A poor electrical connection within the heater can lead to overheating. This poses fire and thermal burn hazards.
Alexanders Inc. Recalls Sweatshirts. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Alexanders Inc.,New York, N.Y., today announced a voluntary recall of sweatshirts sold by the firm. Alexanders operates 15 retail department stores in the greaterNew York metropolitan area and has agreed to provide a full refund to consumers who re- turn the sweatshirts to its stores.
CPSC, Fisher-Price Announce Recall of Toy Police Cars. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Fisher-Price Inc. of East Aurora, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 17,000 toy police cars sold since February 1997. The back of some cars could crack and break apart, presenting a potential choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Vaxcel International Co. Ltd. Announce Recall of Ceiling Fan. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Vaxcel International Co. Ltd., of Glendale Heights, Ill., is voluntarily recalling 1,200 Ceiling Fans. About 80 of these units were improperly assembled with a metal sleeve that could cause exposed wiring. If this occurs, consumers are at an increased risk of receiving an electrical shock during installation or removal.
Franklin Sports Industries, Inc, Recalls All Of Its Lawn Darts. Franklin Sports Industries, Inc. of Stoughton, Massachusetts, is once again voluntarily recalling its yard dart sets because the blunt metal tips may pose a risk of injury, especially to children.
CPSC, Hunter's View Announce Recall of Safety Harnesses Sold with Tree Stands. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hunter's View, of Peoria, Ill. is voluntarily recalling about 500,000 Safety Harnesses Sold with Tree Stands. The harnesses could fail during use, resulting in consumers falling from tree stands and suffering serious injuries or death.
Atmel Corp. Recalls to Upgrade Software in Microcontrollers of Honeywell® Digital Cellular Communicators. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Atmel Corp., of San Jose, Calif. and the security business of Honeywell International, located in Syosset, N.Y., are voluntarily recalling about 4,000 Atmel Microcontrollers used in Honeywell Digital Cellular Communicators. The microcontroller in the communicator can enter an unrecoverable lock-up state due to a programming issue. The lock-up could result in a service interruption, and fail to transmit an alarm signal in the event of a fire or property invasion.
Mahindra USA Recalls Compact Tractors Due to Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). Fuel lines can break or leak, posing a fire hazard.
JB Inc. Recalls Lili Gaufrette Children's Hooded Cardigans with Drawstrings Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Jean Bourget Inc., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 16 children's hooded cardigans with drawstrings. The cardigans have a drawstring through the hood, which can pose a strangulation hazard to young children.
Felt Bicycles Recalls Triathlon Bicycles Due to Risk of Injury. THE S22 AND S32 MODEL ROAD BIKES HAVE FORKS THAT CAN BREAK.
Dollar Tree Stores Recall Counterfeit Extension Cords Due to Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dollar Tree Stores Inc., is voluntarily recalling about 600,000 Power Xtensions. The counterfeit extension cords could have undersized wire and substandard insulation, which can cause overheating, resulting in a possible shock hazard.
CPSC, Kyodo America Recall LawnBott Lawn Mowers Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kyodo America Industries Co. LTD., of Lawrenceville, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 530 LawnBott Lawn Mowers. The cutting blades continue to rotate when the mower is lifted from the ground and the spacing on the side of the lawn mower could allow room for a consumer's foot to go beyond the shield and be struck by the blade. Both instances pose a serious laceration hazard to consumers.
Disco Lights Recalled by Tween Brands Due to Electrical Shock Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Justice. The electrical wiring in the "Style my Room by Justice" lamp base is accessible and the lamp can overheat.
CPSC, Reebok, and Adjmi Announce Recall of Children's Reebok Jacket and Pant Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Adjmi Apparel Group, of New York, N.Y. (Adjmi is an authorized licensee of children's apparel products of Reebok, of Canton, Mass.), is voluntarily recalling Reebok children's windwear and fleece jacket and pant sets. The zipper slider and pull on the jackets can detach, if pulled when the jacket is open. The detached zipper slider and pull can pose a choking hazard to young children.
Legrand Wiremold Recalls Power Strips Due to Electric Shock Hazard. The electrical wires on the under-cabinet 4-outlet power strips are reversed.
Paramount Recalls Trident Ultraviolet Sanitation Systems for Pools Due to Fire Hazard. Electrical arcing can cause the units to catch fire.
CPSC, Blue Star Candles, L.P. Announce Recall of Christmas Candles. Blue Star Candles, L.P., of Lubbock, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 18,000 Christmas candles. The 6-ounce, red Christmas candles are packaged in an 18-count box labeled "Christmas Candles." Each candle sits in a 6-ounce tin container. A label on the bottom of the candle reads in part, "Merry Christmas" with either a Santa Claus or Christmas tree printed on the candle. The candles have a cinnamon spice fragrance named Christmas Joy. Only the 6-ounce candle size is included in the recall.
Near Strangulation Prompts Recall of Roman and Roller Shades by Smith+Noble. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Smith+Noble, of Corona, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1.3 million (1,160,000 roman shades and 115,000 roller shades) Roman and Roller shades. The shades pose a strangulation risk to children.
Siemens Recalls Circuit Breakers Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Siemens Industry Inc., of Alpharetta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 2.2 million Siemens and Murray Circuit Breakers, Load Centers and Meter Combos. The recalled circuit breakers have a spring clip that can break during normal use, leading to a loss of force to maintain a proper electrical connection in the panelboard. This can lead to excessive temperature, arcing or thermal damage at the connection point, and damage to the panelboard's electrical insulation and can result in a fire, property damage, or personal injury.
Allura Recalls Children’s Sleepwear Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. This recall involves two styles of children’s sleepwear garments.
Huish Outdoors Recalls Scuba Diving Regulators Due to Drowning Hazard. The scuba diving regulators can restrict airflow at low tank pressures (below 500 psi), posing a drowning hazard to divers.
Aquarium Heaters Recalled by United Pet Group Due to Fire and Laceration Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, United Pet Group, of Cincinnati, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 1.2 million Marineland Stealth and Stealth Pro aquarium heaters. A wiring problem can cause the aquarium heaters to overheat or break during normal use, damaging the aquarium and posing fire and laceration hazards to consumers. Overheating can cause the heater to shatter or the aquarium glass to break.
CPSC, Wenzel Announce Recall of Ozark Trail and Wenzel Propane Camping Lanterns. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wenzel Co., of St. Louis, Mo., is voluntarily recalling about 290,000 propane-fueled camping lanterns. An insufficient connection between the lantern and the propane cylinder can allow gas to escape and ignite unexpectedly, posing a potential fire and injury hazard to consumers. This hazard can occur during the lighting or normal use of the lantern.
The Children’s Place Recalls Infant Snowsuits Due to Choking Hazard. The metal snaps on the snowsuit can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Panasonic Corporation of North America Announce Recall of DLP Projector. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Panasonic Corporation of North America, of Secaucus, NJ. is voluntarily recalling 21 Panasonic PT-D5500U and PT-D5500UL DLP Projectors. If the lamp drive circuit touches the shield case, the unit is not grounded, and a person were to contact metal terminals at the back of the unit, there is a potential for electric shock.
Gravitron Mobile Amusement Rides To Be Modified. In the wake of the accident last summer at the Missouri State Fair, Sedalia, MO, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Wisdom Manufacturing, Inc. (WMI) are announcing a program to modify the "Gravitron" mobile amusement ride. The ride is a whirling cylinder which uses centrifugal force to hold the riders to their seats as the seats rise, giving the illusion that the floor is dropping out. On August 20, 1991, at the Missouri State Fair, a panel on the ride separated, throwing some patrons onto the midway and injuring 11 children.
CPSC, Emerson Electric Co. Announce Recall to Repair Ceiling Fans. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the Air Comfort Products Division of Emerson Electric Co., of St. Louis, Mo., is recalling about 20,000 ceiling fan installation kits. Over time, the bracket holding the fan can fail, causing the fan to fall or hang by its electric wires. The fans can fall at anytime, possibly causing injuries to bystanders. In addition, exposed wires could pose an electrical shock hazard.
CPSC, Ginger™ Announce Recall of Bathroom Light Fixtures. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ginger, of Fort Mill, S.C. is voluntarily recalling about 5,900 Ginger Kubic, K2 and Surface Bathroom Light Fixtures. The glass shades can separate from the light fixture, posing a risk that a consumer could be cut by the broken glass if the shade were to fall and break.
Cordelia Lighting Recalls Two-Lamp Fluorescent Shop Lights Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Home Depot. Lamp sockets in Commercial Electric brand shop lights can have loose connections. This can cause electrical arcing and fire.
CPSC, Raymond Geddes & Co. Inc. Announce Recall of Velcro Wallets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Raymond Geddes & Co. Inc., of Baltimore, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 55,000 children's Velcro wallets. The zipper pull in the wallet contains lead, which can present a risk of lead poisoning to young children.
Osprey Recalls Child Backpack Carriers Due to Fall Hazard. A child seated in the carrier can slip through the leg openings, posing a fall hazard to children.
Bosch Security Systems Recalls Fire Control Panels Due to Fire Alarm Failure (Recall Alert). The professionally installed G-series fire alarm control panels can fail to activate an audible or visual alarm in the event of a fire.
Petters Consumer Brands Recalls Sunbeam Over-the-Range Microwaves for Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Petters Consumer Brands LLC, of Minnetonka, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 300 Sunbeam Over-the-Range Microwaves. Internal electrical arcing in the microwave can pose a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, SFC America Announce Recall to Repair Fire Extinguishers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Strike First Corp., of Scarborough, Ontario, Canada and Strike First Corporation of America (SFC America), of Front Royal, Va., are recalling about 50,900 Dry Chemical Fire Extinguishers. The fire extinguishers can fail to discharge properly when the trigger is activated, which puts consumers at risk of fire-related injuries.
CPSC, Jøtul North America Announce Recall to Repair Liquid Propane Fueled Stoves. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), J°tul North America, of Portland, Maine is voluntarily recalling about 3,200 J°tul Gas-Fired Stoves. Movement or misplacement of the stove's burner can allow propane gas to settle in the heater, resulting in delayed ignition. The delayed ignition could shatter the door glass and pose a laceration hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Dynacraft Industries Announce Recall of Mountain Bikes Sold at Target Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dynacraft Industries Inc., of San Rafael, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 24,800 mountain bikes. Because some were not welded properly, the front suspension forks on these bicycles can break apart during use, resulting in serious injury to the rider. Dynacraft is aware of 23 reports of injury to riders when the forks on these bikes broke apart. Injuries included a concussion, fractures, cuts, bruises, back strain, and chipped and lost teeth.
CPSC, Atico International Inc. Recall Novelty Mugs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Atico International Inc. of Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., is recalling about 74,400 Lighted Magic Faucet mugs and about 22,400 Lighted Magic Fountain mugs. The novelty mugs' motors could overheat, creating a potential fire hazard.
Pier 1 Imports Recalls Decorative Glass Pumpkins Due to Laceration Hazard. The wooden stem on the top of the decorative pumpkin can detach when picked up, causing the glass pumpkin base to fall and break, posing a laceration hazard.
The Land of Nod Recalls Toy Vegetables Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, The Land of Nod, of Northbrook, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 2,100 ΓÇ£Play With Your VeggiesΓÇ¥ toys. The metal wire in the toy asparagus can become exposed, posing a laceration hazard to children.
Bed Handles Inc. Reannounces Recall of Adult Portable Bed Handles Due to Serious Entrapment and Strangulation Hazards; Less Than 1% Response Rate to Recall. Three women died after becoming entrapped between the mattress and the recalled bed handles.
CPSC, Wompkee Inc. Announce Recall Of "Wompkee" Stuffed Doll. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wompkee Inc., of Portland, ME., is recalling 2,400 Wompkee plush toys. Wires that help to shape and stiffen the toy's ears can protrude through the plush fabric, presenting a sharp point hazard for young children.
H&M Recalls Children’s Bathrobes Due to Violation of Flammability Standard (Recall Alert). The children’s hooded bathrobes fail to meet the flammability standard for children’s sleepwear, posing a risk of burn injuries to children.
CPSC And Jomaps Announce Recall Of M-1 Deck & Roof Cleaner. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jomaps Inc. of Alpharetta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling approximately 14,000 quart and 11,000 gallon sizes of their M-1 Deck & Roof Cleaner. The product, which contains high levels of sodium hydroxide, was not packaged in accordance with the Federal Hazardous Substances Act.
Lifetime Brands Inc. Recalls Lemonade Jars For Lead Exposure Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lifetime Brands Inc., of Westbury, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 6,600 Gemco Lemonade Jars. The metal spigot contains lead and is in direct contact with the contents of the lemonade jar. Lemonade and other beverages can cause the lead to leach from the spigot. Long-term exposure to lead in children may be associated with behavioral problems, learning disabilities, hearing problems and growth retardation.
JCPenney Recalls Cooks Deep Fryers Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), JCPenney, of Plano, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 27,000 Cooks Deep Fryers. The deep fryer has a faulty heating element which can cause it to overheat, posing a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
SpeeCo Recalls Fence Wire Stretchers Due to Laceration Hazard. A recoiling wire can be released from the stretcher unexpectedly and strike bystanders.
CPSC, Baby Buzz'r International Announce Recall of Toy Baby Buzz'r. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Baby Buzz'r International, of Sandy, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 8,800 Baby Buzz'r toys. The red, green and blue button covers on the toy can come off, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, PM International Ltd. Announce Recall to Replace International Adapter Plugs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), PM International Ltd., of Edison, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 22,000 international 2-prong adapter plugs. PM International imported the adapter plugs from a manufacturer in China. The adapter plug can separate when the plug is removed, exposing live electrical conductors, posing an electric shock or electrocution hazard to consumers.
Designers Edge Recalls Halogen Clamp Lights; Potential Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Designers Edge, Inc., Bellevue. WA, is voluntarily recalling the "Mighty Lite" halogen clamp light. When used without the hook, the lamp rotates 180 degrees to a backward position causing tension on the wires at the pivot point between the handle and lamphead. This can cause the wires in the junction box to chafe, energizing the metal components of the clamp light with 120 volts of electricity, posing a shock hazard.
Husqvarna Recalls Grass and Hedge Trimmers Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Husqvarna Professional Products Inc., of Charlotte, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 19,500 grass trimmers and 6,500 hedge trimmers. Fuel can leak from the rubber spacer holding the fuel lines in the fuel tank, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Echo Inc. Announce Recall of Gas-Powered Hand Tools. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Echo Inc., of Lake Zurich, Ill. is voluntarily recalling about 540,000 Echo-brand grass trimmers, brush cutters, hedge clippers, power blowers and power edgers. The fuel lines on these tools can develop an "alligator surface" appearance which could develop into a condition that will allow leakage of gasoline and fuel vapor, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Children's Hooded Sweatshirts Recalled by Brents-Riordan Inc. Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Brents-Riordan Inc. LLC, of Shreveport, La., is voluntarily recalling about 7,400 Hooded Youth Sweatshirts and Jackets. The garments have a drawstring through the hood, which can pose a strangulation hazard to children.
JA-RU Recalls Toy Trains Due To Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), JA-RU Inc., of Jacksonville, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 18,000 My Little Train Classics Toy Trains. The recalled toy contain small parts which can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Sharp Electronics Corp. Announce Recall of Conventional Tube Televisions. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sharp Electronics Corp., of Mahwah, N.J. is voluntarily recalling about 373,000 27-Inch Sharp Conventional Tube (CRT) televisions. The power button can break allowing objects to be inserted through the opening. Foreign materials such as crayons, metal objects or straws can ignite posing a fire hazard.
Dollar General Recalls Tumblers Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dollar General Merchandising Inc., of Goodlettsville, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 63,000 Frankenstein Tumblers. Surface paint on the center of the eyes of some of the cups can contain high levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Gems Sensors Recalls Pressure Transducers Used in Fire Pump Controllers Due to Risk of Failure in a Fire. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Gems Sensors Inc., of Plainville, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 25,000 Gems 3100 pressure detectors/transducers. The transducer can fail to accurately detect water pressure in a fire suppression sprinkler system. This could cause the sprinkler system to fail to activate and pump water to the sprinklers in the event of a fire.
Visonic Amber Personal Emergency Response Kits Recalled Due to Failure to Signal Emergency Assistance. Following a reboot or system reset, the Amber SelectX Base Stations can fail to operate and detect an emergency signal from the personal pendant.
Williams-Sonoma Recalls Hot Chocolate Pots Due To Burn and Laceration Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Williams-Sonoma Inc., of San Francisco, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 28,000 (in the United States) and 700 (in Canada) hot chocolate pots. The handle of the hot chocolate pot can break off during use, posing burn and laceration hazards.
Little Giraffe Recalls Children’s Robes Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The children’s robes fail to meet the federal flammability standards for children’s sleepwear, posing a risk of burn injuries to children.
CPSC, Continental Creations, Inc. Announce Recall of Menorahs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Continental Creations Inc., of New Bedford, Mass. is voluntarily recalling about 480 Cat and Dog Menorahs. The cup holding the candles on these menorahs are not constructed of the correct material and could ignite, posing a fire hazard.
Outdoor Playset Gliders Recalled by Backyard Play Systems Due to Fall Hazard; Repair Kit Provided. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Backyard Play Systems LLC, of Monroe, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 1800 Outdoor Playset Gliders. The retaining rings used to secure the gliders to the playset can become loose or detached, posing a fall hazard to children.
Innovage LLC Retira del Mercado Lámparas Discovery Kids por Peligros de Incendio y Quemaduras. La Comisión para la Seguridad de los Productos de Consumo de los Estados Unidos (CPSC), en cooperación con la firma mencionada más abajo, anunciaron hoy el retiro voluntario del siguiente producto de consumo. Los consumidores deben dejar de utilizar inmediatamente los productos retirados del mercado a menos que se instruya lo contrario. Es ilegal el revender o intentar revender un producto de consumo que ha sido retirado del mercado.
Swim Spa Suction Cover Replacement Program; Hair Entrapment, Drowning Risk Cited. Rio Plastics, Inc. of Brownsville, TX (formerly known as Pool Technology Ltd.) in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is voluntarily replacing certain suction covers on five models of its "Aqua Swim 'N' Spa" swim spas sold between 1986 and 1990. Rio Plastics is taking this action to prevent the risk of hair entrapment and drowning.
Target Recalls Step Stools with Storage Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Target Corporation, of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 206,000 step stools with storage. The wooden step stools can break apart or collapse under the weight of the user, posing a fall hazard.
CPSC and Performance Inc. Announce Bicycle Recall. In cooperation with the U.S Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Performance Inc. of Chapel Hill, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 5,000 bicycles with defective seat posts manufactured by Polygon Industries Corp. of Taiwan, R.O.C. The seat posts have a clamp bolt under them, which can break or fracture. Riders could be seriously injured by losing control of a bicycle with a broken seat post.
Toshiba Recalls AC Adapters sold with Portable DVD Players Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Toshiba America Consumer Products LLC, of Wayne, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 142,000 Toshiba AC Adapters Sold with Portable DVD Players. The AC adapters can fail, causing the portable DVD player to overheat, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Gap Recalls Baby Swimsuits Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Gap Inc., of San Francisco, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 6,500 (in the U.S.) and about 480 (in Canada) Baby swimsuits. The swimsuits have halter straps that were manufactured too short causing the plastic ring located at the neck of the swimsuit to press against the child's throat and obstruct the airway. This poses a strangulation hazard to the child.
Advanced Sports International Recalls Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. The top clamp of the seat post can crack, posing a fall hazard to the user.
Cobb America Inc. Warns Charcoal Grill Purchasers of CO Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cobb America Inc., of Deerfield Beach, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 2,000 Cobb Premier Charcoal Grills. Like all charcoal grills, this grill emits carbon monoxide gas, which can kill within minutes when used indoors. The Web sites, recipe book, and visuals in a promotional video create the impression that the Cobb Cooker can be used indoors. The recipe book says that it can be used on your dining room table, and the promotional video showed a man carrying the grill into the house while the charcoal was still burning.
Viking Range Recalls Gas Ranges Due to Burn Hazard. The ranges' ovens can turn on by themselves, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Vanguard Engines and Fuel Filters Recalled by Briggs & Stratton. Vanguard V-Twin Engines and Fuel Filters - Briggs & Stratton Corp., of Milwaukee, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 2,600 Vanguard V-twin gasoline engines with 9-quart fuel tanks. These engines were used in various brands of construction, industrial and lawn and garden equipment, including vacuum lawn sweepers, air compressors, leaf blowers and pressure washers. "VANGUARD V-Twin" is written on the engines, which are red or black. There are identification tags on the side of these engines with model number 294442, 294447, 303442, 303447, 350442 or 350447. Only engines with 9-quart fuel tanks manufactured by Briggs & Stratton are part of this recall. These tags also show an 8-digit code with the first six digits indicating the date the engine was manufactured by year, month and day. For example, 990215XX would indicate the engine was manufactured on February 15, 1999. The recalled engines were manufactured between February 15, 1999, and November 17, 1999. The engines were sold separately and to equipment manufacturers. Equipment containing these engines were sold nationwide from March 1999 through November 1999. The engines alone sold for about $1,200.
Dan Post Boot Company Recalls Safety Boots and Shoes Due to Injury Hazard. The boots and shoes can fail to protect feet when heavy or sharp objects fall on them, posing an injury hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Ames True Temper Announce Recall of Wheelbarrows. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ames True Temper Inc., of Camp Hill, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 647,000 wheelbarrows. The plastic wheel assemblies on these wheelbarrows, manufactured by a predecessor company, can break when being inflated with high-pressure air hoses. This can result in plastic pieces exploding from the rims of the wheels, possibly hitting nearby consumers and causing lacerations and other injuries.
Rechargeable Power Banks Recalled by Daniel M. Friedman & Associates Due to Fire Hazard. The power banks can overheat, posing a fire hazard
Scott, Trek Recall Bicycles with SR Suntour Front Forks Due to Crash Hazard. Front forks on 13 models of Scott and 11 models of Trek 2011, 2012 and 2013 bicycles can break.
Metal Jewelry Sold by Family Dollar Stores Recalled Due to Risk of Lead Exposure to Children. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Family Dollar Stores, of Charlotte, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 205,000 Rachel Rose and Distinctly Basics Assorted Metal Jewelry. The recalled jewelry contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
ORTOVOX Recalls Avalanche Transceiver Due to Loss of Emergency Communications Capability. The S1+ hardware can fail, resulting in an inablitity to transmit a discoverable signal during an emergency even when appearing to function properly.
McCrory Corporation Recalls Sweet Family Blessings Baby Doll. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), McCrory Corporation of York, PA is voluntarily recalling approximately 89,000 "Sweet Family Blessings Baby" dolls, item numbers 208363 and 208371, model number 6957, because the arms and legs could detach and become a choking hazard to young children.
U.S. Polo Assn. Recalls Girl's Jacket Due to Strangulation Hazard. The jackets have a band that wraps around the neck.
CPSC, National Presto Industries Inc. Announce Recall of Deep Fryer Basket Handles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), National Presto Industries Inc. (Presto) of Eau Claire, Wis., is voluntarily recalling to replace up to 50,000 Presto CoolDaddy electric deep fryer basket handles. The handles on the fryer baskets can come off, resulting in hot oil spattering the user and bystanders.
Hamilton Beach Recalls Toasters Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Hamilton Beach Brands Inc., of Glen Allen, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 300,000 Hamilton Beach classic chrome 2-slice toasters. The heating element in these toasters can remain energized indefinitely when an item is placed in the toaster which may ignite the contents, posing a fire hazard if the toaster is near flammable items.
CPSC and Supreme Premium Products Inc. Recall Surge Protectors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Supreme Premium Products Inc. of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 7,500 surge protectors. The surge protectors come in two models. Both models have undersized wires, loose connections and improper grounding, which present fire, shock and electrocution hazards.
CPSC, Target Corp. Announce Recall of Men's Sweatshirts. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Target Corp., of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 men's hooded, zip-up sweatshirts. Trends Clothing Corp., of Miami, Fla., manufactured the sweatshirts. The fleece fabric on the inside of these sweatshirts fails to meet federal mandatory standards of fabric flammability because it can ignite readily if exposed to flame, and therefore presents a serious risk of burn injuries in violation of the Federal Flammable Fabrics Act.
Walmart retira del mercado cafeteras General Electric® debido a peligro de incendio. La U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (Comisión para la Seguridad de los Productos de Consumo de Estados Unidos), en cooperación con la firma nombrada abajo, anunció hoy un retiro voluntario del mercado del siguiente producto de consumo. Los consumidores deben dejar de usar de inmediato los productos retirados del mercado a menos que haya instrucciones en contrario. Es ilegal el revender o intentar revender un producto de consumo que ha sido retirado del mercado.
CPSC, Wal-Mart Stores Announce Recall of Reef Rocker Infant Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wal-Mart Stores Inc., of Bentonville, Ark. is recalling about 54,260 Reef Rocker infant toys. The seam on the plastic balls can separate, releasing the small toy inside and posing a choking hazard to young children.
TJX Recalls Glass Beer Mugs Due to Burn and Laceration Hazards; Sold Exclusively at HomeGoods Stores. The glass beer mug can break if heated or used with hot liquid, posing burn and laceration hazards.
Recall Warning issued on Windmill Rattle Because of possible Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Artsana of America, Inc., New York, New York, today announced a recall of children's rattles which could be a choking hazard.
CPSC, North States Announce Recall To Repair "Superyard" Enclosures. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), North States Industries of Minneapolis, Minn., is offering a repair kit for approximately 70,000 Superyard children's play enclosures and 6,000 Superyard Extension Kits manufactured between November 8, 1994 and October 17, 1995. Small plastic locking posts can be pulled loose when any of the enclosure's panels are disconnected, presenting a choking hazard to small children.
Shimano American Corp. Recalls Quick-Release Device for Bicycles Posing Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Shimano Inc., of Osaka, Japan, is voluntarily recalling about 8,500 Release Devices. The quick release skewers can unexpectedly fail or break when locked in position. When this happens the rider could lose control and fall.
CPSC, Small Small World Announce Recall of Plush Rabbit Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Small Small World, of Englewood, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 60,000 plush rabbit toys sold under The Boyds Collection label. The eyes on these toys could detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Barnett Outdoors Recalls Slingshots Due to Risk of Injury. The wrist strap can slip off the wrist brace when the pouch is pulled back  and cause the body of the slingshot to snap back and strike the user.
Gerber Legendary Blades Recalls Combo Axe Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Gerber Legendary Blades, of Portland, Ore., a division of Fiskars Brands Inc., of Madison, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 103,000 Gerber® Gator® Combo Axes. The knife in the axe handle can come out when the axe is used for chopping or hammering, posing a laceration hazard to the user.
Specialized Bicycle Components Recalls Bicycles Due to Fall and Injury Hazards. The front fork can break on both women's and men's 2008 and 2009 Globe model bicycles.
CPSC, Cub Cadet Corp. Announce Recall of Compact Tractors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cub Cadet LLC (Cub Cadet), of Cleveland, Ohio is voluntarily recalling 2,000 Cub Cadet Series 7000 Compact Tractors. The tractor's high/low shift lever could pop out of gear into neutral during operation on steep slopes with attachments, such as a back-hoe or front-end loader installed. This could result in the machine "free-wheeling" until the brake is applied or the transmission is re-engaged, posing a risk of the operator losing control of the tractor.
John Deere Recalls Riding Lawn Tractors Due to Crash Hazard. The brake arm on the lawn tractor can fail, posing a crash hazard that could result in serious injury or death.
Masterbuilt Recalls LP Gas Smokers Due To Fire Hazard. The smoker’s gas hose can disconnect posing a fire hazard.
Tankless Water Heaters Recalled for Repair Due to Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the Water Heating Division of Rheem Sales Company Inc., of Montgomery, Ala. and Paloma Industries Inc., of Oxnard, Calif., are voluntarily recalling about 42,200 Power Vent tankless water heaters. Components inside the water heater may shift during transit, causing an air filter door switch to operate improperly. If the switch fails and the air filter door is out of place, the water heater could continue to operate and dust and lint could build up, posing a carbon monoxide poisoning hazard.
Atico International USA Recalls Heaters Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Dollar General Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Atico International USA, Inc. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 92,000 TrueLiving Heater Fans and Portable Quartz Radiant Heaters. These heaters have caught fire, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Glass Dimensions Announce Recall Of Satellight Oil Candles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Glass Dimensions of Essex, Mass., is announcing a recall of approximately 1,082 Satellight Oil Candles that may leak fuel and catch fire. The Vermont Fire Protection Division informed CPSC of this hazard after receiving reports of one fire that resulted from a faulty candle.
Link & Pan Of Texas Inc. And CPSC Recall Stuffed Bears. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Link & Pan of Texas Inc. of Houston, Texas, is voluntarily recalling more than 4,000 stuffed toy bears. During CPSC testing, the bears' noses and eyes came off presenting a potential choking hazard to young children.
Coca-Cola Foods Recalls Its "Cool Cuffs". In cooperation with the Consumer Product Safety Commission, Coca-Cola Foods announced today that it is voluntarily recalling a promotional item called "Cool Cuff" which was distributed in conjunction with Hi-C fruit drinks. The premium is being recalled because it contains small parts that do not comply with CPSC regulations.
Children's Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by Dysfunctional Clothing Due to Strangulation Hazard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, in cooperation with Dysfunctional Clothing LLC, of Irvine, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 450 Hooded Fleece Sweatshirts. The jackets have a drawstring through the hood which can pose a strangulation hazard to children.
BlenderBottle Recalls Whiskware Glass Dressing Shaker Bottles Due to Laceration Hazard. The bottom of the glass dressing shaker bottle can break when the metal agitator strikes the glass bottom, posing a laceration hazard.
Troy-Bilt String Trimmer Sold at Lowe's Recalled for Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), MTD Southwest Inc., of Tempe, Ariz., is voluntarily recalling about 20,000 Troy-Bilt 4-Cycle Gasoline String Trimmers. The blade that trims the excess string of these weed trimmers can detach from the plastic shield covering the trimmer head. The blade can be thrown outward, hitting the user or bystander, resulting in a laceration.
CPSC, IBM and LiteOn Technology Announce Expansion of Previously Announced Recall of Computer Monitors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IBM, of Armonk, N.Y., and LiteOn Technology, of Taipei, Taiwan, are voluntarily expanding their recall to repair program for G51 and G51t computer monitors manufactured by LiteOn and sold by IBM. The original recall, which was announced on March 4, 2003, involved 56,000 computer monitors. The expansion includes 63,000 additional G51 and G51t monitors that were manufactured through September 1998. The monitor's circuit board can overheat and smoke, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, LG Electronics Inc. Announce Recall of Goldstar, General Electric, and Sears Kenmore Dehumidifiers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LG Electronics Inc., of Seoul, South Korea, is voluntarily recalling about 100,000 Goldstar, General Electric, and Sears Kenmore portable dehumidifiers. These dehumidifiers have an internal electrical connection that can overheat, presenting a potential fire hazard to consumers.
Toys R Us Recalls Imaginarium Activity Walker Due to Choking Hazard. The bolt and spacer that attaches the front wheels to the baby walkers can detach.
Amerisun Recalls to Repair Snow Blowers Due to Injury Hazard. The pulley bolt can loosen and cause the snow blower to get stuck in drive mode, posing an injury hazard.
CPSC and Gold Bug Announce Recall of Carter's Infant Carriers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gold Bug of Denver, Colo., is recalling over 5,400 Carter's infant carriers. The adjustable shoulder strap of the carrier can become unfastened or separate from the buckles, resulting in an infant falling from the carrier.
Toys "R" Us Recalls Wooden Coloring Cases Due To Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Toys "R" Us Inc., of Wayne, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 27,000 Imaginarium Wooden Coloring Cases. The printed ink on the outer packaging of the wood case contains lead. Also, some of the black watercolor paint contains excessive levels of lead, which violates the federal lead paint standard.
Formation Inc. Recalls Coca-Cola® Themed Drinking Glasses Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Formation Inc., of San Bruno, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 300 Drinking Glasses. The inner wall of the double-walled glasses can break easily, posing a laceration hazard to consumers.
Arctic Cat Recalls Textron Off-Highway Utility Vehicles Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). The lower front suspension arm can fail, posing a crash hazard.
CPSC, Deb Shops Inc. Announce Recall of Decorative Candleholders. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Deb Shops Inc., of Philadelphia, Pa. is voluntarily recalling about 48,000 decorative candleholders. The hook or handle of the candleholder can overheat and break, causing the lit candle to fall out and pose a fire hazard.
Dillon Importing Company Recalls Toy Jewelry. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dillon Importing Company (Division of M G Novelty Co., Inc.), Oklahoma City, OK is voluntarily recalling two charm necklaces and one stretch bracelet. CPSC tested the jewelry and found that small parts separated when the elastic band broke, presenting a potential choking hazard to young children.
Samsung Recalls to Upgrade Certain Cell Phones; Could Fail to Reach Emergency 911 in a No-Service Area. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Samsung Telecommunications America, of Richardson, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 160,000 Samsung ΓÇ£JitterbugΓÇ¥ Cell Phones. The recalled cell phones that are in a no-service area and display an ΓÇ£out of range, try again laterΓÇ¥ message could fail to connect to emergency 911.
Nielsen-Kellerman Recalls Microphones Due to Electric Shock, Burn Hazards. The metal boom of NK R2 coxswain microphones can conduct electricity from an exposed speaker wire or connector.
CPSC, In-Mar Trading Inc. Announce Recall of Extension Cords. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), In-Mar Trading Inc. of Miami, Fla., is recalling about 115,300 extension cords. The cords have undersized wires that cannot carry the advertised load, plugs that are not polarized properly, poor strain relief and lack of overcurrent protection presenting fire, shock and electrocution hazards.
CPSC, Commend Co. Ltd. Announce Recall of Dining Set Chairs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Commend Co. Ltd., of Fair Lawn, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 600 HD Design, 5-piece Dining Sets. The wooden chairs can break, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Playpens to be Modified Because of Hazards to Children. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, C&T International, Inc., Moonachie, New Jersey, today announced it is voluntarily making available to consumers a free modification kit for its mesh-sided playpen with drop sides, model number 585, "Circus America." Some of the playpens fail to warn users of a potential suffocation hazard if an infant is left in the playpen with one of the sides down. All of the playpens present a finger crushing hazard at two locations in the drop side locking system. In addition, when the playpens are folded for storage, it is possible for a child to remove the plastic feet which may present a choking hazard.
Issues Complaint Seeking Recall Of Johnson & Johnson Crib Toys. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced that its staff has issued a Complaint against Johnson & Johnson Baby Products Co., Inc. seeking a recall of over 1.6 million crib toys because of alleged strangulation hazards to infants. The Commission authorized issuance of the Complaint by a 3-l vote with Acting Chairman Graham and Commissioners Scanlon and.,Armstrong voting for the Complaint and Commissioner Dawson voting against it. Commissioner Statler recused himself from participating in this matter.
CPSC, Ariens Co. Announce Recall of Snow Throwers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ariens Co., of Brillion, Wis., is voluntarily recalling 571 Ariens 13-Horsepower Sno-Throw, Model 924506 snow throwers. The blade may not stop when the blade brake control is applied, resulting in continued blade movement. The potential for injury exists if consumers make contact with the rotary blade.
CPSC, Meco Corp. Announce Recall of Children's Folding Chairs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Meco Corp., of Greeneville, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 175,000 Juvenile Folding Chairs. Children's fingers can become caught or entrapped in the hinge and slot areas of the chair, posing a pinch or cut hazard.
"Cutie Pie" Dolls Recalled For Potential Choking Hazards. Largo Toys of New York is voluntarily recalling all models of "Cutie Pie" dolls because the arms can be pulled off and may present choking hazards to young children.
CPSC And Wayne Industries Announce Recall To Fix Signs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wayne Industries Inc. of Clanton, Ala., is voluntarily recalling over 40,000 portable electric advertising signs. The signs lack ground fault circuit interrupters (GFCIs) and could expose consumers to electric shock or electrocution.
McDonald's Voluntarily Stops Playmobil Promotion And Recalls. The Consumer Product Safety Commission announced today that McDonald's Corporation of Oakbrook, Illinois, has voluntarily stopped further Playmobil toy promotion and distribution as of November 1st. McDonald's made this decision immediately after learning that recent tests showed the Playmobil toys failed to comply with CPSC's regulation designed to prevent choking hazards to children under three. The Playmobil toys, which are manufactured by the Schaper Manufacturing Company of Minneapolis, Minnesota, have not been involved in any known choking incidents.
CPSC, Cervélo Cycles Inc. Announce Recall of Bicycle Forks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), CervΘlo Cycles Inc., of Toronto, Canada, is voluntarily recalling bicycle forks. The forks on the bicycles can develop cracks near the crown area resulting in failure of the fork and posing a risk of injury to the rider.
Steve & Barry's University Recalls Children's Outerwear with Drawstring Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Steve & Barry's University Sportswear, of Port Washington, N.Y, is voluntarily recalling about 334,000 Children's upper outerwear garments with drawstrings. The garments have a drawstring through the hood, posing a strangulation hazard to children. In February 1996, CPSC issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled on the neck and waist of drawstrings of upper garments, such as jackets and sweatshirts. CPSC was alerted to this hazard by the state of Wisconsin.
CPSC, Rocky Shoes & Boots, Inc. Announce Recall of Men's Safety-Toe Hiker Boots. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rocky Shoes & Boots Inc., of Nelsonville, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 1,300 pairs of Men's Safety Toe Waterproof Hiker Boots. Product testing has demonstrated that the boots may not comply with applicable safety standards for crush and impact resistance. Consumers could suffer impact foot injuries.
HALO SleepSacks Wearable Blankets Recalled Due to Choking Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Babies R Us. Petals from the floral embellishment on the infant sleep blankets can detach.
CPSC, Jetmax International Ltd. Announce Recall to Repair Children's Rocking Chairs Sold at Target Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jetmax International Ltd., of Stamford, Conn., is voluntarily recalling to repair about 48,000 children's rocking chairs. The rear legs of the chair can separate from the rocker's base causing it to collapse, and the child seated in the chair can fall.
CPSC, Oreck Manufacturing Co. Announce the of Recall Certain A/C Adaptors for its ZipVac Hand Held Rechargeable Vacuum. Oreck Manufacturing Company, of Long Beach, Miss., is recalling A/C adaptors for approximately 10,000 ZipVac rechargeable vacuums. The recalled A/C adaptor is charger model U090010D that has two circular holes in it's A/C's adapter plug end. The vacuums were sold directly by Oreck or by QVC as a premium for the purchase of an Oreck upright vacuum cleaner. The vacuums with the recalled adaptor were sold from February 2001 to June 2001.
Bathtub Toys Recalled by Munchkin Due to Risk of Injury. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Munchkin Inc, of North Hills, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 34,000 Bathtub Toys. The intake valve on the bottom of the submarine toy can suck up loose skin, posing laceration hazard to children.
Rashti & Rashti Expands Recall of Infant Garments Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rashti & Rashti, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 16,000 Taggies Sleep'n Play Infant Garments (an additional 6,200 were recalled on July 1, 2008). The snaps on these garments can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Allen Organ Company Announce Recall of Wooden Organ Bench. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Allen Organ Company of Macungie, Penn. is voluntarily recalling 1,757 wooden organ benches. The wooden bench may collapse because not enough glue was used during assembly.
Violation of Federal Mattress Flammability Standard Prompts Recall of Mattress Sets by Tropical Bedding. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Tropical Bedding Mfg., of Caguas, Puerto Rico, is voluntarily recalling about 15,000 Mattress Sets (Mattresses and Mattresses with Foundations). The mattress sets fail to meet mandatory federal open flame standard and pose a fire hazard to consumers.
Child's Catastrophic Brain Injury Prompts Recall of Residential Elevators Sold Exclusively by Coastal Carolina Elevators Due to Crushing Hazard. The elevator can operate while the gate door is open  and can result in serious injury.
CPSC, Thrifty Paper Co. Announce Recall of Electric Fans. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Thrifty Paper Co. Inc., of Hempstead, NY, is voluntarily recalling about 26,000 electric fans. These electric fans have undersized wiring, use a power plug that is not polarized, overheat and have an improperly sized grill, all of which could cause electrocution, electric shock, fire, and finger entrapment hazards to consumers.
Cheryl & Co. Recalls Jingle Bell Ornaments Due to Laceration Hazard; Sold Exclusively By QVC. The decorative cutouts on the ornament have sharp metal edges that pose a laceration hazard to consumers.
Electric Candle Warmers Recalled by Provo Craft & Novelty Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Provo Craft & Novelty Inc., of Spanish Fork, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 730,000 Candlsense Warmers. The internal heating element of the candle warmer can detach and melt the bottom of its plastic casing, which can in turn ignite or scorch the surface on which the candle warmer is placed, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
BMC Recalls Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. Variations in tire dimension, tire pressure, head set play and ride load, can result in insufficient space between the front wheel and downtube, posing a fall hazard.
Acorn Stairlifts Recalls Motorized Stair Lifts Due to Fall Hazard. The seat post on five versions of the Acorn Superglide 120 stair lift can  separate from the main seat support.
Craftsman Brand Chainsaws Recalled by MTD Southwest Due to Fire Hazard. The chainsaws can leak fuel, posing a fire hazard.
IMS Recalls Car Chargers Used With Halogen Spotlights Sold at Sears and K-Mart Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), International Merchandising Service Inc. (IMS), of Fullerton, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 210,000 Car Chargers Used with Power System Plus 3 Million Candlepower Spotlights. The car charger is incompatible with the spotlight's battery, which can cause it to overcharge inside of a vehicle and pose a fire or burn hazard to consumers.
Star Sales Company Recalls Teddy Pet With Cassette. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Star Sales Company, Knoxville, TN today announced a voluntary recall of its Teddy Pet With Cassette #3851 because the bear could catch on fire due to inadequate insulation around the wires within the teddy bear. The company sold 1,015 units of the Teddy Pet With Cassette nationwide since 1986. No injuries have been reported. The Ohio State Fire Marshall's Office reported to CPSC one fire incident with this teddy bear resulting in property damage only.
CPSC, PTI Sports Inc. Announce Recall of Schwinn Toddler Bicycle Helmets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), PTI Sports Inc., of Rancho Cucamonga, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about about 9,000 Schwinn-brand Toddler bicycle helmets. The helmets do not comply with impact testing requirements in the Consumer Product Safety Act.
Raynor Marketing Recalls Quantum Office Chairs Due to Fall Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Office Depot Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Raynor Marketing LTD, of West Hempstead, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 150,000 Quantum Realspace PRO 9000 Series Mid-Back Multifunction Mesh Chairs and Multifunction Mesh Chairs with Headrests. The bolts attaching the seatback on the recalled chairs can loosen and detach, posing a fall and injury hazard to consumers.
Work ‘N Leisure Recalls Air Valves Used in CPR Training Due to Choking Hazard. The end-cap of the valves can detach in a person’s mouth while being used during CPR training, posing a choking hazard.
Huffy Recalls Slider Tricycles Due to Loss of Control Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Toys R Us. The handlebar on the 2012 model year 20-inch, three-wheeled Slider can unexpectedly loosen while in use. This poses crash and fall hazards for the rider.
Delonghi Voluntarily To Replace Control Panels On Oil-Filled Electric Heaters. Delonghi is providing free replacement control panels for oil-filled radiator-type electric heaters manufactured by DeLonghi S.p.A. from 1980 through 1988. DeLonghi is taking this action to correct what the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) considers to be potential fire hazards in some of the electric controls.
Lenovo and IBM Announce Recall of ThinkPad Notebook Computer Batteries Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lenovo (United States) Inc., of Research Triangle Park, N.C. and International Business Machines Corp., of Armonk, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 168,500 battery packs. These lithium-ion batteries can cause overheating, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Horizon Hobby Recalls Batteries Due to Fire Hazard. The battery used to power remote control vehicles can overheat when being used or charged and cause a fire.
CPSC, Coville Inc. Announce Recall Of Garments Made From A Flammable Fleece Fabric. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Coville Incorporated are announcing the recall of dangerously flammable garments made from a fleece-type fabric. An estimated 160,000 garments ranging from sweatshirts to skirts are involved in the recall.
China Pyrotechnics, Inc. Recalls Two Fireworks Devices. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), China Pyrotechnics, Inc., Florence, AL is voluntarily recalling its "Magnum Force" and "Gold Rush" fireworks display devices. These display devices may tip over during operation and fire the charges horizontally or at various angles, resulting in serious injury to persons nearby. Although the Commission is not aware of any incidents involving these particular fireworks devices, the Commission knows of two incidents involving larger multiple-shot devices manufactured and sold by other firms which tipped over, struck, and killed the victims.
Cycling Sports Group Recalls Cannondale Mountain Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. The OPI stem/steering tube assemblies can fail, posing a risk of injury from a fall.
CPSC And IBM Announce Recall Of Thinkpad AC Adapters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IBM PC Company of Somers, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling 32,000 AC adapters supplied with the Thinkpad laptop computer in the United States. The AC adapter has an internal fault that can pose an electrical shock hazard. The Thinkpad computer is not involved in the recall.
American Mattress Manufacturing Recalls Renovated Mattresses Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The mattresses don't meet the federal flammability standard. They pose a fire hazard to consumers.
Fox Factory Recalls Evolution Mountain Bike Suspension Forks Due to Fall Hazard. The front fork can separate and cause the front wheel to detach. The forks were sold on some BMC, Cannondale, Commencal, Diamondback, GT, Kona, Lapierre, Norco, Orbea, Raleigh, Rocky Mountain, Santa Cruz, Scott, Specialized and Trek bicycles.
CPSC, KitchenAid Announce Recall to Repair Food Processors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), KitchenAid Home Appliances, of Benton Harbor, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 220,000 food processors for repair. A cap on the blade unit can dislodge during use. When dislodged, the cap can get mixed in with food, presenting a choking hazard.
Cosco Recalls Two-Rod Guard Rails For Toddler Beds; Asphyxiation Risk Cited. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cosco, Inc., Columbus, Indiana, is voluntarily recalling some of its toddler bed guard rails. The recalled guard rails have a 3/4-inch tubular metal frame and two thin horizontal rods within the frame. The metal toddler bed guard rails were sold as part of Cosco tubular metal toddler beds (model 10T23 and 10T33) and also sold separately as Cosco model 10T71. Cosco toddler bed guard rails with three thin horizontal rods within the bed rail frame, and Cosco bed rails for full size beds, are not involved in this recall. The two-rod version being recalled was manufactured between August 1, 1991 and June 10, 1992. They were sold in stores nationwide during that period and for a while thereafter.
CPSC, Ceraflame Inc. Announce Recall of Ceramic Tea Kettles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ceraflame Inc., of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 3,000 ceramic tea kettles. The tea kettles can break or burst during use, spilling hot water, which poses the risk of burn injuries to consumers.
Mini Bikes Recalled by Baja Motorsports Due to Fall and Crash Hazards; Sold Exclusively at Tractor Supply Company. The front fork can separate from the wheel, posing fall and crash hazards to riders.
John Deere Recalls Lawn Tractors Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Deere & Company of Moline, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 15,500 Lawn Tractors. Hardware used to hold the mower blade brake assemblies on the mower decks can break. This can cause the mower blades to spin longer than normal after the operator turns off the power, posing a laceration hazard.
HealthPostures Recalls IntimateRider Chair and RiderMate Bench Due to Fall Hazard (Recall Alert). The stitching on the cloth cover can loosen, posing fall and injury hazards.
CPSC, LTD Commodities Announce Recall of Fleece Pants with Long Waist Drawstring on Jacket. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LTD Commodities of Bannockburn, Ill. is voluntarily recalling 11,187 two-piece fleece pant sets. The waist drawstring on jacket is longer than 3 inches when the waist is expanded to its fullest width, and there are toggles and knots at the end of the un-tacked drawstring. This can cause the drawstring to catch on protrusions (such as bus doors or handles), potentially causing injury or death if the person is dragged by the vehicle.
Devan Designs Furniture Manufacturer To Provide Modification Kits. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Devan Designs, Inc. of Marion, NC is providing a free modification kit for certain pieces of furniture in its "Rainbow," "Color Plus," and "Perimeter" Collections, marketed under the brand name Lexington Furniture Industries. The drawers of this furniture are equipped with easy gliding rollers which offer minimal resistance when opening. If several drawers of these pieces are opened to their full extension, the furniture can tilt forward, possibly causing serious injury or death.
Gerry Recalls Some "Good Vibes" Infant Carriers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gerry Baby Products Company (Gerry), of Thornton, Colo., is offering free replacement infant carriers to approximately 9,500 consumers who have Gerry model 037 and 038 Good Vibes Infant Carriers with handles molded in the second week of September 1993. Gerry determined that a manufacturing error occured during the second week of September 1993 that could cause some of the handles produced during this period to break. A broken handle can cause the carrier and infant to fall, possibly injuring the infant.
Belle Vanity Benches Sold Exclusively at Tuesday Morning Stores Recalled By LaMont Limited. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, LaMont Limited, of Burlington, Iowa, is voluntarily recalling about 1,900 Belle Vanity Benches. Legs on the Belle vanity bench can detach at the weld and allow the bench to collapse, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Wooden Toys Recalled by Daiso Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Daiso California LLC, of Burlingame, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 430 Wooden Toys. The toys have small parts that can break and detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Portable Water Heaters Recalled. Rhinehart Manufacturing Co., Spencerville, Ind., in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), today warned consumers about a possible serious shock hazard stemming from its "Miti-Mite" portable, immersible electric water heater.
iCandy World Recalls Cherry Strollers Due to Strangulation Hazard. The opening between the grab bar and seat bottom of the stroller can allow an infant's body to pass through and become trapped at the neck.
CPSC, Kmart Announce Recall of Tru-Burn Portable LP Gas Grills. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kmart Corporation, of Troy, Mich., is recalling about 40,000 Tru-Burn Portable LP Gas Grills. The burner manifold connection can separate during use, resulting in a flame outside the grill which could burn consumers and ignite nearby combustibles.
CPSC, Riviera Trading Inc. Announce Recall of Children's Costume Bracelets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Riviera Trading Inc., of New York, N.Y. is voluntarily recalling about 7,100 metallic costume bracelets. The bracelets contain high levels of lead and pose a lead poisoning hazard to children.
CPSC, BSH Home Appliances Corp.Announce Recall of Thermal/Microwave Ovens. Thermal/Microwave Ovens - BSH Home Appliances Corp., of Los Angeles, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 2,300 Thermador® brand combination thermal/microwave ovens. The oven has a steel frame around glass panels and comes in a black, white or stainless steel finish. It is sold as a single or double-stacked unit. The model numbers included in the recall are CM301UB, CM302UB, CM301UW, CM302UW, CM301US, and CM302US with serial numbers that begin with 2003 through 2010. The model and serial numbers are located on a data plate inside the grill located beneath the control panel that reads "Thermador" on the right hand side of the oven. Appliance and specialty stores nationwide sold the ovens to homebuilders and contractors from about May 2000 through May 2001 for about $3,000 to $4,600.
Troy-Bilt Recalls Children's Gardening Gloves Due to Lead Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), MTD Products Inc, of Valley City, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 80 Budding Gardener Complete Gardening Sets. The stamp-painted logo on the backside of the gardening gloves contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Cane Creek Recalls Bicycle Shocks Due to Risk of Injury. The shock absorber is marked with graphics that incorrectly identify the adjustment directions for High Speed Rebound (HSR), posing a fall hazard to a rider.
San Francisco Music Box Company Recalls Plush Animals Because Of Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the San Francisco Music Box Company of San Francisco, CA is voluntarily recalling six plush animals imported from China because the eyes may come off posing a fatal choking hazard to children.
Coast Spas and Franklin Electric Co. Recall Coast Spas Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Coast Spas Manufacturing Inc., of Langley, British Columbia, Canada and The Engineered Motor Products Division of Franklin Electric Company Inc., of Bluffton, Ind., are voluntarily recalling 8,000 Coast Spas with Franklin Electric Motors. The recalled spas have a circulating pump and motor assembly, which can overheat and pose a fire hazard.
CPSC, Camil Corp. Ltd. Announce Recall of Aguarras Floor Cleaner. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Camil Corp. Ltd. of Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, is recalling 1,000 bottles of Aguarras floor cleaner, which contains turpentine. The product's packaging is not child-resistant; not labeled with the necessary warnings, cautions for use and instructions for appropriate first aid in case of ingestion; and resembles a liquor flask. The packaging violates the Federal Hazardous Substances Act and the Poison Prevention Packaging Act. Turpentine presents a serious poisoning hazard, possibly causing chemical pneumonia, pulmonary damage and death.
CPSC and Polaris Announce Snowmobile Retrofit. In cooperation with the U. S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Polaris Industries Partners L.P. of Minneapolis, Minn., is announcing the voluntary recall of about 19,320 snowmobiles, model years 1994, 1995, and 1996. The snowmobile's engine coolant tank may expand, interfering with the operation of the brakes. Snowmobile drivers or riders could be injured or killed if the brakes fail.
North Central Industries Recalls Fireworks Fountains Due to Burn and Injury Hazard. The rear plug of the candle can dislodge while lit, posing burn and fire hazards to the user if the user is holding the device.
Toys "R" Us, Inc. Recalls Wooden Shaky Head Rattle Toy Because Of Potential Choking Hazards. Toys "R" Us, Inc. of Paramus, New Jersey is voluntarily recalling 11,000 "Wooden Shaky Head Rattles" because they may pose a potential choking hazard to young children.
Montessori N' Such Recalls Metal Vases, Pails and Other Containers Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, in cooperation with Montessori N' Such, of Sterling, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 various containers used in instructional kits. Surface paints on the products contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Flow Sports Inc. Recalls Snowboard Bindings Due to Fall Hazard. A pin can disengage and cause the binding to open.
Meijer Recalls Oscillating Ceramic Heaters Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Meijer, of Grand Rapids, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 6,700 Touch Point Oscillating Ceramic Heaters. The oscillating mechanism in the heaters can short out, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Jumpin' Jeans Denim Paint Kits Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Polymerics, Inc. of Waltham, MA is voluntarily recalling approximately 700,000 paint kits because the paint on the wooden handles of the brushes sold with the kits contains excess lead. Children's products which contain paint with lead in excess of 0.06 percent by weight are banned by CPSC regulations.
CPSC Issues Warning on Children's Winter and Holiday-Themed Charm Bracelets with High Levels of Cadmium. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission is warning consumers about Children's Metal Charm Bracelets imported by Buy-Rite Designs, of Freehold, N.J. (no longer in business.) The bracelets contain high levels of cadmium. Laboratory analysis determined that in certain tests, over 20,000 micrograms of cadmium were released from the snowman alone. Cadmium can be toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Pier 1 Imports Recalls Outdoor Patio Swivel Armchairs Due to Fall Hazard. The swivel armchair can tip backward while rocking and consumers can fall off, posing a fall hazard.
Micro-Dome Food Preserver Recalled. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in cooperation with Micro-Dome of San Ramon, CA, has warned consumers of certain safety hazards associated with the use of the "Micro-Dome Food Preserver" manufactured by Micro-Dome and sold and distributed to consumers after August 1987. The CPSC has also urged consumers to destroy all food that has been preserved using a Micro-Dome Food Preserver.
Huffy Recalls Bicycles Due To Cranks Falling Off; Riders Can Lose Control of Bike. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Huffy Corp., of Miamisburg, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 22,000 2007 Huffy "Howler" and "Highland" Bicycles. The bicycle crank can unexpectedly come off, causing the rider to lose control, fall and suffer serious injuries.
Mayborn USA Recalls to Repair Baby Monitors Due to Strangulation Hazard. Child can pull cord into crib and wrap around the neck, posing a strangulation hazard.
Seattle Bike Supply Recalls Redline Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Seattle Bike Supply of Kent, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 200 Redline D640 Bicycles. The head tube can separate from the frame, causing the rider to lose control and fall. This poses a risk of serious injury.
Wal-Mart Recalls Dolls Due to Burn Hazard. The circuit board in the chest of the electronic my sweet love/ my sweet baby cuddle care dolls can overheat, causing the doll to get hot.
CPSC, SunTech Enterprises Inc. Announce Recall Baby Walkers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), SunTech Enterprises Inc., City of Commerce, Calif., is voluntarily recalling 4,100 "Sun Kids" and "Happy Baby" Baby Walkers. The walkers will fit through a standard doorway and are not designed to stop at the edge of a step. Babies using these walkers can be seriously injured or killed if they fall down stairs.
American Signature Recalls Table Lamps (Recall Alert). 
CPSC, Lamplight Farms Inc. Announce Recall of Tiki® Bamboo Torches and Replacement Fuel Canisters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lamplight Farms Inc., of Menomonee Falls, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 963,000 Tiki bamboo torches and about 18,000 replacement fuel canisters. The surface coating of some flame guards on these bamboo torches and replacement canisters can absorb the fuel and ignite. This can cause the torch and nearby combustibles to catch on fire, posing a risk of burn injuries and property damage.
UJ Trading Recalls Knight Hawk Toy Helicopters Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, UJ Trading, of Houston, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 18,500 Danbar Knight Hawk Toy Helicopters. The battery housing under the helicopter canopy can overheat while charging, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Memcorp Inc. Recall Disney®-Brand Personal DVD Players Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), McNair Technology Co. Ltd., of China, Unitech Battery Ltd., of China, and Memcorp Inc., of Weston, Fla. are voluntarily recalling about 102,000 Battery Packs Sold with Disney®-Brand DVD Players. The battery packs sold with these DVD players can overheat and possibly burst when recharging, posing a risk of burns.
CPSC, Flora-Lite Co. Announce Recall of Christmas Light Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Flora-Lite Co., of Clearwater, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 7,500 strings of Christmas lights. The lights' wires can be easily pulled out of the plugs and light sockets. The lights could pose electrocution and electric shock hazards to consumers and could pose a fire hazard.
CPSC, American Household Inc., (Formerly Sunbeam Corp.) Announce Recall of Star ME-1 Dry Fire Sprinklers, Administrative Lawsuit Settlement. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and American Household Inc. (AHI), formerly known as Sunbeam Corporation, of Boca Raton, Fla., today announced the nationwide recall of about 60,000 Star ME-1 dry fire sprinklers. Chemetron Corporation, an inactive subsidiary of AHI, manufactured these sprinklers from 1977 through 1982. This recall announcement follows the resolution of an administrative proceeding filed by CPSC on October 9, 2001, in which CPSC alleged these sprinklers are defective and are likely to fail to operate in a fire, thereby exposing consumers to the risk of death or serious injury.
CPSC, BRIO® Announce Recall of Toy Baking Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BRIO Corp., of Germantown, Wis., a subsidiary of BRIO AB of Sweden, is recalling 6,450 baking set toys. The sets include a hand mixer with a knob that can break off, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC Accepts Provisional Consent Agreement With India Malaysia Imports, Inc., New York, New York. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced a provisional consent agreement that prohibits a New York City shop from importing and selling products that fail to meet the standards of the Flammable Fabrics Act.
CPSC, Texas Instruments Announce Battery Charger Recall For Travelmate 4000m Notebook Computers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Texas Instruments Incorporated of Dallas, Texas, is announcing a voluntary recall of approximately 3,200 optional external battery chargers for batteries used with Texas Instruments TravelMate 4000M Notebook computers. These external battery chargers may have a defect involving a small electronic component. If this defect is present and if consumers cover or insulate the external charger during use, preventing normal air circulation, the charger could overheat, creating a potential fire hazard.
CPSC, Philips Electronics Announce Recall of Speaker Power Adapters Sold with HP Computers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Philips Electronics, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 93,000 speaker power adapters sold with Hewlett-Packard Co. (HP) business desktop computers. The speaker power adapter's power cord connector is not grounded, posing a potential shock hazard to consumers.
Samara Brothers Recalls Children's Two-Piece Overall Sets, Snaps Contain Lead. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Samara Brothers LLC, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 200 Starting Out Shirt and Overall Sets. The coatings on the snaps in the overalls and shirt contain excessive amounts of lead, posing a serious risk of lead poisoning and adverse health effects to young children.
Vanguard Furniture Recalls Chests of Drawers Due to Serious Tip-Over and Entrapment Hazards (Recall Alert). The recalled chests are unstable if they are not anchored to the wall, posing a serious tip-over and entrapment hazard that can result in death or injuries to children. The chests do not comply with the performance requirements of the U.S. voluntary industry standard (ASTM F2057-14).
CPSC, Honeywell Consumer Products Announce Recall of Moveable Baseboard Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Honeywell Consumer Products Inc. (HCP), of Southborough, Mass., is voluntarily recalling about 450,000 moveable baseboard heaters. The heating element in these baseboard heaters can short-circuit and ignite combustible material under the heater, posing fire and burn hazards to consumers.
CPSC And Charpente Announce Pull Toy Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Charpente Division of Michel & Co., of Culver City, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 12,000 Classic Winnie the Pooh pull toys. Children can choke on the small wooden ball at the end of the toy's pull cord, or strangle on the toy's pull cord.
Target Recalls Children's Belts Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Target Corp. of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 105,150 boys' and girls' belts. The belt buckles contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Kubota Recalls Zero Turn Mowers Due to Injury Hazard (Recall Alert). The rollover protective structure (ROPS) on the mower can loosen and fail to protect the operator in a rollover accident, posing a risk of injury.
Ventamatic Recalls Cool Draft Misting Fans Due to Risk of Fire and Electric Shock. The fan's wiring is not properly grounded, posing fire and electric shock hazards.
AOSOM Recalls Wooden Playpens Due to Choking and Laceration Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, AOSOM LLC, of Tualatin, Ore., is voluntarily recalling about 5,000 wooden playpens. The wooden playpen can break, split and/or crack at points where screws and other hardware are located. Small, broken wood pieces and hardware from the playpen can pose a risk of choking and laceration hazards to children. In addition, an unstable playpen can fall over onto a child, posing an entrapment hazard.
Smoke Detectors Recalled. Some Commercial and residential battery-operated photoelectric smoke detectors sold since 1979 under the brand names of Chloride Pyrotector, Archer, Masterguard, Vanguard, Vantage I and Protect-er Systems are being recalled because a potentially defective electronic microchip may prevent the alarm from sounding in the presence of smoke.
Desk Lamps Sold at Office Depot Recalled for Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Environmental Lighting Concepts Inc., of Tampa, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 6,800 Taylor Desk Lamps. The fiberglass sheath intended to protect the electrical cord can become improperly aligned during consumer assembly of the lamp. This poses a shock hazard to consumers.
Dimension Industries Recalls Outdoor Patio Set Rockers Due to Fall Hazard: Sold Exclusively at Home Depot (Recall Alert). Home Depot's Hampton Bay-branded Niles Park Collection patio set rocking chair can break during normal use, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Hoverboard LLC Recalls Self-Balancing Scooters/Hoverboards Due to Fire Hazard. Hoverboard LLC Recalls Self-Balancing Scooters/Hoverboards Due to Fire Hazard
Graco Recalls Strollers Due to Fingertip Amputation and Laceration Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Graco Children's Products Inc., of Atlanta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 1.5 million Graco's Passage, Alano and Spree Strollers and Travel Systems. The hinges on the stroller's canopy pose a fingertip amputation and laceration hazard to the child when the consumer is opening or closing the canopy.
Landscape Structures Recalls Oodle Swings Due to Injury Hazard (Recall Alert). The swing seat is suspended too close to the ground, posing an injury hazard to children who can get their legs caught underneath the swing seat.
A&A Global Industries Recalls Children's Bracelets Due to Lead Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), A&A Global Industries, of Cockeysville, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 4 million Children's ΓÇ£Groovy GrabberΓÇ¥ Bracelets. The paint on the metallic band beneath the decorative cover contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Battery Operated Toy ATV's Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Pines of America Inc., a toy manufacturer located in Fort Wayne, Indiana, has voluntarily initiated a program to replace a battery wiring harness used in the ATV Trailblazer - Model No. PP9083.
CPSC, Lithonia Lighting Announce Recall of Indoor HID Light Fixtures. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lithonia Lighting of Conyers, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 93,200 High Intensity Discharge (HID) light fixtures with acrylic lenses and/or reflectors. A component in the light fixture can leak fluid, which can degrade the acrylic lenses and reflectors, causing them to crack and fall. Falling pieces of acrylic can injure someone below the fixture.
Battenfeld Technologies Recalls Three-Digit Combination Locking Handgun Vaults Due to Lock Malfunction. The locks on Lockdown Compact and Large handgun security vaults can fail and allow unintended access to the contents inside.
AmerTac Recalls Night Lights Due to Fire and Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, American Tack & Hardware Co. Inc. (AmerTac), of Saddle River, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 261,000 LED night lights. An electrical short circuit in the night light can cause it to overheat and smolder or melt, which can burn consumers or result in fire.
CPSC Warns Of Tennis Net Tightener Danger. The Consumer Product Safety Commission today issued an alert to warn consumers of the risk of injury especially to small children associated with the M.R. Lane Jiffy A-4 Tennis Net Tightener. The Commission is aware of 18 injuries and one fatality which occurred when an ll-year-old girl was struck on the neck while adjusting the lever. The other incidents include facial and mouth injuries.
Jimco Recalls Bistro Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. The chair’s seat can break, posing a fall hazard.
7,000 Whistle Switches Recalled. In cooperation with the Consumer Product Safety Commission, Mark Engineering Inc., Fitchburg, Massachusetts, warns owners that Model 1C of their "Whistle Switch" Remote Control Device, manufactured prior to June 30, 1978, may present a fire hazard. The product was also private labeled for the Invento Products Corp., Long Island City, New York, as the "Sonic Switch." The firm estimates that 7,000 units remain in use.
Children's Merry-Go-Rounds Sold Exclusively at Toys R Us Recalled by Pacific Cycle Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Pacific Cycle Inc., of Madison, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 15,000 Playsafe Spinning Quad Merry-Go-Rounds. The inner bearing on the merry-go-round can fail, causing the seat assembly to suddenly drop to the ground. This poses a fall hazard to children riding the merry-go-round.
CPSC and Value City, Schottenstein Stores Announce Recall of Gel Candle Kits. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Value City and Schottenstein stores, of Columbus, Ohio, are voluntarily recalling about 2,300 children's gel candle kits. When burned, the gel candle can melt the plastic candleholders included with the kit, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Children's Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by Jason Evans Associates Due to Strangulation Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Burlington Coat Factory. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jason Evans Associates, LLC, of Hewlett, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 18,300 Boys Fleece & Flannel Zip Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings. The hooded zip sweatshirts have a drawstring through the hood which can pose a strangulation hazard to children.
CPSC, Midwest Folding Products Announce Recall to Repair Optional Guard Rails on Standing Choral Risers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Midwest Folding Products Inc., of Chicago, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 Optional Guard Rails sold on Standing Choral Risers. Choral risers equipped with an optional guard rail can tip over under certain loading conditions, which poses a risk of injury from falling from the risers.
Canon Recalls for Repair Wireless File Transmitter Due to Risk of Allergic Reaction. A chemical used in the rubber on the top cover of the WFT-E7A transmitter poses a risk of skin irritation.
Rixson Exterior Gate Closers Recalled Due to Injury Hazard; Made by Assa Abloy Italia. The gate closer mechanism can break and eject metal pieces including the spring or it can spray oil, posing a risk of injury.
CPSC, Eton America Announce Recall of Youth All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs). Eton America LLC's of Spartanburg, S.C., is voluntarily recalling about 1400 four-wheel drive all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). The recalled 2003 model ATVs are red, yellow and black. They have the brand name "Viper Jr" written on both sides of the front chassis. These are small ATVs intended for children between ages 6 and 12. Dealerships nationwide sold these ATVs from August 2002 through January 2003 for $1500.
CPSC, Jake's Fireworks Inc. Announce Recall of Fireworks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jake's Fireworks Inc., of Pittsburg, Kan., is voluntarily recalling about 75,000 reloadable kits. The aerial shells are fused, shaped, and labeled in a way that could cause consumers to unintentionally place them into the launch tube upside down, resulting in a ground-level explosion. Such an explosion can cause serious injuries to consumers in close proximity of the device.
CPSC, Unilever Home and Personal Care USA Announce Recall of Snuggle® Teeny Bean Bears Included with Fabric Softener. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Unilever Home and Personal Care USA, of Greenwich, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 150,000 Snuggle Teeny Bean Bears with a nightcap and pom-pom. The yellow pom-pom can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Five Firms Announce Recall of Backpack Blowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), five firms are recalling about 50,500 backpack blowers. The fuel tanks on these blowers can leak, posing a fire hazard and risk of burn injuries to consumers.
CPSC, World Wide Cycle Supply Inc. Announce Recall of Bicycles Sold at Toys "R" Us. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), World Wide Cycle Supply Inc., of Islandia, N.Y. is voluntarily recalling about 25,000 Harley-Davidson 16-inch BMX Bicycles. The fork that holds the front wheel can separate at the weld, causing the rider to fall and suffer injuries.
West Marine Recalls Folding Bicycles; Frames Can Break Causing Riders to Fall. West Marine Jetty Express 2 and Port Runner 2 bicycle frames can break. Bikes are used in and around docks and marinas.
CPSC, GT Bicycles Announce Recall of Bicycle Frames. In cooperation with the U. S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), GT Bicycles of Santa Ana, Calif., is recalling 10,000 GT Speed Series and Robinson bicycle frames. The frames can crack and separate, causing a rider to lose control of the bicycle, fall and be injured.
School Specialty Expands NeoRok Stools Recall Due to Fall Hazard (Recall Alert). 18- and 20-inch tall models of the stool can break during use, posing a fall hazard.
Black & Decker Recalls Hammer Drills Due to Injury Hazard. The side handle sold with the drill can slip or break, leading to a loss of control of the tool, posing an injury hazard
CPSC, L&N Sales and Marketing Announce Recall of Cordless Sweepers Sold on QVC. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), L&N Sales and Marketing Inc., of Hatboro, Pa., is voluntarily recalling 59,400 ProSweep Rechargeable Cordless Sweepers. The sweeper can overheat, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Fitness Quest Inc. Announce Recall to Repair Ab Lounge™ Exercise Products. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Fitness Quest Inc., of Canton, Ohio is voluntarily recalling about 460,000 Ab LoungeÖ, Ab LoungeÖ 2, and Ab LoungeÖ Ultimate Exercisers products. When opening or folding up these exercise machines, consumers can catch their fingers in the hinges. This can result in lacerations, crushing, or amputation to finger tips. This does not occur while users are exercising.
Kyber Outerwear Recalls Children's Sweaters Due to Strangulation Hazard. The sweaters have a drawstring around the neck that poses a strangulation  hazard to children if the drawstring gets entangled or caught on playground  slides, school bus doors or other moving objects.
Junk Food Clothing Co. Recalls Children's Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Junk Food Clothing Co., of Los Angeles, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 24,000 Children's hooded sweatshirts with drawstrings. The hooded sweatshirts have a drawstring at the neck which can pose a strangulation hazard to children.
Schneider Electric Recalls APC Surge Protectors Due to Fire Hazard. APC series 7 and 8 SurgeArrest surge protectors made before 2003 can overheat, smoke and melt. 700 incidents and $1.6 million in fire damage reported.
Recall Of Black And Decker Lawn Mowers. The Black & Decker Manufacturing Company, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, today announced the recall and repurchase of approximately 18,000 of its Model No. 8055 19" Battery Powered (Cordless) Lawn Mowers because of a possible fire hazard. The lawn mowers were sold nationwide between 1976 and the present and are orange and white in color.
BRP U.S. Inc. Recalls Youth All Terrain Vehicles Due to Collision Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BRP U.S. Inc., of Sturtevant, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 1,200 Model Year 2008-2009 Can-Am Youth ATVs. If the rider is ejected and the cord strap is pulled, the shutoff switch can fail to disable the engine. The ATV can operate uncontrolled, until the engine returns to idle, and cause a collision with bystanders, vehicles or other objects. This poses a serious risk of injury.
Foursquare Recalls Hooded Youth Jackets with Drawstrings Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Foursquare Outerwear, of Irvine, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1,300 Foursquare Hooded Jackets. The jackets have a drawstring through hood which poses a strangulation hazard to children.
Electric Fans Recalled by Agis Enterprises Co.. PRODUCT: Electric Fans - Agis Enterprises Co. Inc., of West Keansburg, N.J., is recalling about 11,800 electric fans. The fans being recalled are a 12-inch desk fan, a 16-inch desk fan, a 16-inch stand fan, an 18- inch stand fan with three legs, and an 18-inch stand fan with a round base. Writing on all of these fans includes "AGIS" and "MADE IN TAIWAN." Discount stores in the metropolitan New York area sold these electric fans from April 1998 through September 1999 for about $50.
Kolcraft Car Seat Repair Program. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kolcraft Enterprises Inc. of Chicago, IL, is voluntarily undertaking a program to correct a safety related defect involving potentially defective plastic clips used in children's and infant car seats it manufactures. The clips attaching the padding on the car seats may break or be pulled off which could present a small parts choking hazard to young children.
Oil Burning Candles Recalled by Target. Oil Burning Candles - Target Corp., of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 16,000 glass and metal oil burning candles. The candles come in two shapes: rectangular and circular. The glass portion of the candle is supported by a metal black metal frame. There are two glass pieces that stack on top of each other. The lower glass piece has a reservoir for oil. The top glass piece has an opening for a wick. The circular candle measures 6.25 inches in diameter and the rectangular candle measures 5.5 inches by 13.5 inches. These candles were made in China. Target stores sold these candles nationwide from January 2000 through May 2000. The circular candles sold for $8 and the rectangular candles sold for $15.
Cost Plus Recalls Santorini Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cost Plus Inc., of Oakland, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 8,600 Santorini Chairs. The seat weld can fail and allow the chair to collapse, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
LaRose Industries Recalls Cra-Z-Jewelz Ultimate Gem Jewelry Machine Due to Violation of Lead Standard. The "Slider Bracelet" in the jewelry making kit contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health issues.
CPSC, Starbucks Coffee Co. Announce Recall of Children's Tumbler Cups. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Starbucks Coffee Co., of Seattle, Wash., is voluntarily recalling approximately 38,000 plastic Bearista Bear tumbler cups. When the flexible straw on the cups is chewed, small pieces of plastic can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Master Forge Gas Grills Sold at Lowe's Stores Recalled Due to Fire and Burn Hazards; Made by Guangdong Vanward Electric. If improperly assembled, the hose connecting the gas tank to the regulator can come into contact with the burner box and cause a fire.
Toro Recalls TimeCutter Riding Mowers Due to Fire Hazard. The fuel filters on the mowers can become brittle and fractured, allowing fuel to leak and posing a fire hazard.
Mophie Recalls iPod Touch Rechargeable External Battery Case Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Mophie LLC, of Paw Paw, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 6,118 Rechargeable External Battery Cases. The battery case's integrated circuit switch can overheat, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
Hewlett-Packard Recalls Notebook Computer AC Power Cords Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. The AC power cord can overheat, posing a potential fire and burn hazard.
CPSC, Neurosmith Announce Recall of Children's Plush Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Neurosmith of Long Beach, Calif., voluntarily recalled 4,400 Pet Me Platypus toys. Any of the four plastic button covers can detach, posing a small parts choking hazard to young children.
Kayak Paddle Floats Recalled by NRS Due to Drowning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), NRS, of Moscow, Idaho, is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 NRS Sea Kayak Paddle Floats. The plastic tubes used to inflate the paddle float could break and deflate, posing a drowning hazard to consumers.
Tween Brands Recalls Children's Metal Jewelry Due to High Levels of Cadmium. The children's metal jewelry contains high levels of cadmium.
CE North America Expands Recall of Fan Heaters Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at H-E-B. The fan heaters can overheat, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Cenex Harvest States Cooperatives Announce Recall to Inspect Propane Gas. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cenex Harvest States Cooperatives (CHS) of Inver Grove Heights, Minn., is voluntarily coordinating the testing of propane gas delivered to dealers in five states. The propane may not have contained enough odorant to allow consumers to smell leaking gas, presenting a fire, explosion or thermal burn hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Wild Country Ltd. Announce Recall of Helium Carabiners. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), DMM Engineering, of Gwynedd, U.K. is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 Wild Country-brand Helium carabiners.The carabiner gate may come open under a heavy load, which will significantly reduce the strength of the carabiner. The carabiner could break if the climber falls, posing a risk of serious injury or death to the climber.
Playskool Travel-Lite Portable Cribs Recalled By Kolcraft -- Suffocation Risk Cited. Kolcraft Enterprises, Inc., Chicago, IL, is voluntarily recalling 11,638 Playskool Travel-Lite portable cribs, models 77101 and 77103. The cribs were manufactured by Kolcraft under license from Playskool and sold nationally from 1990 to 1992. This recall is being conducted in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). The Commission has received three reports of infant deaths due to suffocation in these cribs. In each case an infant allegedly was found entrapped in a folded crib.
Currey & Company Recalls Chandeliers Due to Impact Injury Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Ethan Allen (Recall Alert). The loop at the top of the chandelier can break causing the chandelier to fall, posing an impact injury hazard.
"Power Bolt" Pitchbacks Sold at Dick's Sporting Goods Recalled Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dick's Sporting Goods, of Pittsburgh, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 57,000 "Power Bolt" Y-Frame and Ultimate Y-Frame Adjustable Pitchbacks. The upper portion of the frame can collapse after both locking pins are removed, posing a laceration hazard.
W.P. Appliances Recalls Combination Grills/Griddles Due to Overheating and Electrical Shock Hazards; Sold Exclusively at HSN. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, W.P. Appliances Inc., of Hollywood, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 27,000 Wolfgang Puck Electric Reversible Tri-Grill/Griddles. A defect in the electrical wiring of the electric grills/griddles can pose a risk of overheating, melting and an electrical shock hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Square D Company Announce Recall of Circuit Breakers. Square D Company of Palatine, Ill., is voluntarilly recalling about 40,000 MA/MH circuit breakers manufactured between October 2000 and March 2002 for between $3,000 to $9,000.
Louis Garneau Recalls Aerodynamic Bicycle Helmets Due to Injury Hazard. In cold temperatures, P-09 bicycle helmets can fail to protect the wearer.
CPSC, Boston Billows Inc. Announce Recall of Nursing Pillows. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Boston Billows Inc., of Nashua, N.H. is voluntarily recalling approximately 8,000 Boston Billows Nursing Pillows. If infants are placed on these pillows and left unattended, there is a risk of suffocation. Infant pillows and cushions are banned under the Federal law. Infant pillows have a flexible fabric covering, are loosely filled with plastic beads, easily flattened, intended for use by infants under 1 year old, and capable of conforming to the body or face of an infant.
Lila + Hayes Recalls Children’s Playwear Due to Choking Hazard. The buttons can detach from the garment, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Patton Announces Voluntary Corrective Action Program for Space Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Patton Electric Company, New Haven, Indiana is conducting a voluntary corrective action program for certain Patton model HF-6 and HF-12W and Sears, Roebuck and Co. model 201.362010 portable plastic-body electric space heaters. Patton is undertaking this action to correct manufacturing deficiencies in the heaters which may result in the heaters catching fire.
Baby Appleseed Recalls Cribs Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Baby Appleseed, of City of Industry, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 500 Davenport Cribs. The cribs fail to meet the federal safety standards for cribs. The cribs have a two mattress support system. The secondary mattress support, used for the lowest position, does not meet the full 26 inch minimum height in its lowest position, allowing children inside to crawl over the railing, posing a fall hazard.
Design Ideas Recalls Magnets Due to Risk of Ingestion. The small magnet can easily detach from the office and refrigerator magnets. If swallowed, the magnets can link together inside the intestines and can cause perforations, sepsis and death.
CPSC, Zebco Announce Recall of Children's Fishing Poles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), W.C. Bradley/Zebco Holdings Inc. doing business as Zebco, of Tulsa, Okla. is voluntarily recalling about 1.5 million Children's Fishing Poles. The paint on the rods of these fishing poles contains lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
CPSC, Royce Union Bicycles Co. Inc. Announce Recall of Men's Mountain Bicycles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Royce Union Bicycles Co. Inc., of Hauppauge, N.Y., is recalling about 3,700 men's mountain bicycles. The frames of these bikes can break apart, causing falls and serious injuries to riders.
Starbucks Recalls Bodum Recycled Coffee Presses Due to Laceration Hazard. The coffee press’ plunger knob can break and expose the metal rod, posing a laceration hazard.
Applica Consumer Products Inc. Recalls Black & Decker® Brand Coffeemaker for Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Applica Consumer Products Inc., of Miramar, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 420,000 Black & Decker Brand Thermal Coffeemakers. The coffeemaker may not turn off as programmed, causing the unit to overheat and melt, and posing a risk of fire and burn injury.
Vosges Haut-Chocolat Recalls Festival of Lights Gift Box Sets Due to Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). The plastic menorah can catch fire if candles are allowed to burn to the base of the menorah.
Makita Recalls Circular Saws Due to Laceration Hazard. Makita Recalls Circular Saws Due to Laceration Hazard
Diving Unlimited International Recalls Weight Systems Due to Drowning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Diving Unlimited International Inc. of San Diego, is voluntarily recalling about 1,454 units (in the U.S.) and 46 units (in Canada) of DUI Weight & Trim System Classic and DUI Weight & Trim System II. Manufacturing defects in the lanyard connecting the handle to the pocket or the cable securing the pocket to the harness can prevent the weight pockets from easily detaching from the harness and releasing the weights when the handle is pulled. This poses a drowning hazard to consumers.
Quality Foam Recalls Mattresses Due to Violation of Federal Mattress Flammability Standard. The mattresses fail to meet the mandatory federal flammability standard for mattresses, posing a fire hazard.
Baby Hammocks Recalled by Kaplan Early Learning Due to Fall and Strangulation Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kaplan Early Learning Company, of Lewisville, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 200 La Siesta Yayita Baby Hammocks. The hammock can flip over, posing a serious fall hazard and strangulation hazard to infants who become entrapped in the seat's restraint straps while upside down.
Innopower Recalls Hawk Climbing Sticks Due to Fall Hazard. Folding steps can bend or break during use, posing a fall hazard.
CPSC and Wagner Announce Recall to Repair Wallpaper Steamers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wagner Spray Tech Corp. of Plymouth, Minn., is repairing about 44,000 wallpaper steamers sold under the brand name "Wagner Power Steamer" (model 700). Under certain conditions, steam and hot water can forcefully escape from the unit when the filler cap is opened. Consumers can be burned by the hot water and steam.
Perfection Kerosene Heaters. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Perfection Product Company of Waynesboro, Georgia, today announced a retrofit program for Perfection Model 770 and Model 770-l portable kerosene heaters.
Insolroll Recalls Roller Shades with Solar and Rechargeable Motors Due to Fire Hazard. The motor of these roller shades has a built-in lithium battery that can overheat while being charged.
Weather Radios Recalled by Oregon Scientific. Weather Radios - Oregon Scientific Inc., of Tualatin, Ore., is recalling about 10,000 desktop weather radios. These All Hazards Weather Radios use S.A.M.E. technology to receive local weather warnings broadcast by the National Weather Service. The radios also function as AM/FM clock radios and have model number WR-122 printed on the bottom. Writing on the radio reads "NOAA Weather Radio" and "OREGON SCIENTIFIC." The radios have two rectangular screens which display both a standard clock and a dot matrix display of weather forecasts and warnings of severe weather, such as tornadoes and hurricanes. Also, there are five black buttons on the right side of the radios that read "NOAA," "MESSAGE," "AM/FM," "PRESET" and "VOLUME." The unit measures about 6.75 inches long by 5.25 inches wide. The weather radio can be placed upright on a table or mounted on a wall. Office super stores, mass merchandise, home and hardware stores, catalog, and web sites sold the radios from December 1999 through July 2000 for about $70. Only radios with model number WR-122 are part of this recall.
CPSC, American Biophysics Corp. Announce Recall of Accessory Used to Clean Mosquito Magnet®. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), American Biophysics Corp., of North Kingstown, R.I., is voluntarily recalling about 335,500 ΓÇ£LΓÇ¥-Shaped Quick-Clear Valve Adapters used with Mosquito Magnet Insect Traps. The maintenance accessory is an ΓÇ£LΓÇ¥-shaped, Quick-Clear Valve Adapter that can leak or break apart during use, possibly striking and injuring nearby persons or releasing pressurized carbon dioxide (CO2) that can freeze exposed skin.
Johnson & Johnson Crib Toys Case Settled. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Johnson & Johnson Baby Products Company announced today that the company and the Commission staff had entered into a consent agreement resolving a pending CPSC action relating to three of the company's toys -- Soft Triplets, Piglet Crib Gym, and Triplets marching Band. These toys have a common design consisting of three cloth dolls held together by short pieces of elastic with a plastic ring at each end.
CPSC, HearthSong Announce Recall of Children's Toy Balls. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), HearthSong Inc., of Madison, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 22,500 Peek-a-Boo Balls. The wooden rings on the holes of the product may crack, allowing the small wooden heads to fall out and pose a choking hazard to young children.
Kang Sheng Group Recalls Butterfly Push Toy Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Kang Sheng Group, of Lexington, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 1,440 Butterfly Push Toys. The plastic balls on the butterfly's wings can break, causing small metal balls inside to come free. These metal balls pose choking and aspiration hazards to young children.
Tiger Electronics Hippo-Lot-O-Fun Musical Computer Toy May Present Hazard To Infants And Small Children. The Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced that a musical computer crib and toddler toy, the HIPPO-LOT-O-FUN Musical Computer Toy, Model No. 7-511, distributed by Tiger Electronic Toys, Inc., 909 East Orchard, Mundelein, Illinois 60060, may present choking and ingestion hazards because of a small knob which can be pulled off.
Cybex International Recalls Decline Free Weight Benches Due to Fall and Injury Hazards (Recall Alert). The Decline model free weight benches are designed for use in professional gyms and come in three model numbers: 16060, 16061 and 16062.
Trampolines Recalled by Panline USA Due to Fall Hazard. Alex model Little Jumpers trampolines recalled. The handlebar on the toddler-sized trampoline can break.
Hewlett-Packard Co. Recalls Fax Machines Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hewlett-Packard Co., of Palo Alto, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 367,000 HP Fax 1010 and 1010xi Machines. An internal electrical component failure can cause overheating of the product posing a risk of burn or fire.
Fuel Cups On Party Fondue Sets Recalled. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission in cooperation with Gimbel Brothers, Inc., New York, New York, is voluntarily recalling approximately 3,046 Party Fondue Sets sold in Gimbels stores in New York City, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, due to a fuel leak at the seam of the alcohol-burning fuel cup.
Michaels Recalls Halloween Candle Holders Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. The candle holder can ignite, posing fire and burn hazards.
Bosch Recalls SkilSaw Miter Saws Due to Laceration Hazard. The lower guard on the 10-inch compound miter saw, model number 3316, can break and contact the blade during use.
CPSC, By Us International Co. Ltd. Announce Expanded Recall of Bicycle Forks Installed on Mountain Bicycles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), By Us International Co. Ltd., of Taiwan, is recalling about 40,000 Ballistic front suspension forks installed on certain mountain bicycles. The forks on these bicycles can break apart, causing riders to lose control and fall. By Us International Co. previously announced the recall of 13,500 of these forks in May 2000. The firm has since disclosed that more of these forks are included in the recall.
CPSC, Graco Announce Recall to Repair Activity Trays and Bath Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Graco Children's Products Inc., of Elverson, Pa., is recalling about 100,000 activity trays and bath sets with suction cups for repair. The suction cups can detach, presenting a choking hazard to young children.
Cycling Sports Group Recalls Commuter Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard. The fork axle on Cannondale Bad Boy and Bad Girl commuter bicycles can crack.
CPSC, Direct Source International Announce Plastic Halloween Bucket Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Direct Source International Inc. of Blue Ash, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling 11,700 packages of small plastic halloween candy buckets. Dillon Stores of Hutchinson, Kan., and CPSC found prohibited levels of lead in the black, red, and yellow paint, which peels readily from the buckets. The lead paint can cause lead poisoning in young children, who may ingest the paint from the banned buckets.
CPSC and Pfizer Announce Shave Gel Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the Consumer Health Care Group of Pfizer Inc. is announcing a voluntary recall of cans of PureSilk Shave Gel for women sold between October 1995 and June 1996. The inner liner of the can may corrode, and as a result the can may rupture, which could propel a plastic component or the gel from the can. Consumers could be injured by sharp edges of the ruptured can or by the plastic component.
Pelican Power Brick Battery Charger Recalled for Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Electro Source LLC, of Vernon, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 231,000 Pelican Power Brick Battery Chargers. The battery charger's circuit board can overheat and cause its plastic cover to melt which poses a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
Maytag Recalls Dishwashers Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Maytag Corp., of Newton, Iowa, is voluntarily recalling about 2.3 million Maytag® and Jenn-Air® brand dishwashers. Liquid rinse-aid can leak from its dispenser and come into contact with the dishwasher's internal wiring which can short-circuit and ignite, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Toro Co. Remind Consumers of Lawn-Boy Power Mower Recall. With warm weather returning to much of the U.S., it is also the beginning of the lawn mowing season. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), and Toro Co., of Bloomington, Minn., is reminding consumers of the cooperative recall of approximately 78,000 Lawn-Boy power mowers, announced in January. Interference with the mower's mulching fan can cause the mower blade to crack and break off. Broken pieces of the blade can be propelled from underneath the mower, possibly injuring the operator or a bystander.
CPSC, Healthtex Announce Recall of Baby Garments. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Healthtex, a division of VF Playwear Inc., of Greensboro, N.C., is recalling about 260,000 of its baby garments.  Snaps on these garments can detach, posing a choking hazard to babies.
Risk of Impact Injury Prompts Recall of Estes-Cox Model Rockets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Estes-Cox Corp., of Penrose, Colo., is voluntarily recalling about 80,000 X-15 Flying Model Rockets. The model rocket's side or engine retainer ring can separate and cause the rocket to fall without the nose cone separating and the parachute deploying, posing a risk of an impact injury to nearby consumers.
GCI Outdoor Recalls to Repair Stadium Seats Due to Risk of Injury. The backrest on BleacherBack stadium seats can fail.
Rivers Edge Recalls Hunters Tree Stands due to Fall Hazard. The snap-hook assembly on Big Foot, Lite Foot and Baby Big Foot tree stands used for bow and rifle hunting can fail.
Vista Railing Systems Recalls ProBuilt Aluminum Posts Due to Fall Hazard. The posts can separate from base, posing a fall hazard.
Cost Plus World Market Recalls Bleeding Drip Taper Candles Due to Fire Hazard. The candles’ high flame can ignite the surface of the wax, posing a fire hazard.
DeVilbiss Air Power Co Recalls Air Compressors Due to Fire Hazard. The air compressor motor can overheat. Recalled compressors were sold under the Craftsman, EX-CELL, Porter-Cable and Pro-Air II brand names.
CPSC, Arctic Cat Inc. Announce Recall of All-Terrain Vehicles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Arctic Cat Inc., of Thief River Falls, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 45,000 all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). The ball joints on the front suspension of these ATVs can fail, resulting in a loss of control. This can cause the ATV to overturn, posing a risk of serious injury or death to riders.
Galison/Mudpuppy Recalls Wire Bound Journals and Calendars Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Galison/Mudpuppy, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 90,000 Wire-O Bound Journals and Calendars. The paint on the metal spiral bindings of the journals contains excessive levels of lead, which violated the federal lead paint standard.
Personalized Infant Long Johns Recalled by Personal Creations Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Personal Creations, of Lemont, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 5,500 Red Baby Long Johns. The metal snaps on the long johns can loosen and detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Polaris Recalls Sportsman All-Terrain Vehicles Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). The electronic power steering unit can malfunction, posing a crash hazard.
JCPenney Recalls Arizona® Newborn and Infant Pants Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), JCPenney Co., of Plano, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 24,000 Arizona Newborn and Infant Denim Pants. The metal snap at the waist can detach posing a choking hazard to infants.
CPSC, Sauder Woodworking Co. Announce Recall of TV/VCR Carts. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sauder Woodworking Co., of Archbold, Ohio is voluntarily recalling about 300,000 TV/VCR carts. The carts can tip over and the television can fall off, posing a risk of serious injury or death if the TV and cart fall on a child.
CPSC, Discovery Toys Announce Recall of Children's Toy. Discovery Toys of Livermore, Ca., is voluntarily recalling about 21,000 Up, Down & Around toddler maze toys, model #1612. The toy contains four-circuit flexible wires coated in blue, orange, red and yellow plastic tubes, sliding multi-colored shaped beads, and two abacuses that attach to a wooden base. The toy measures 9 1/2 inches by 8 inches by 7 inches. Four suction cups anchor the maze to most non-porous surfaces. Discovery Toys' Educational Consultants sold the recalled toy nationwide from July 2001 to January 2002.
Sportex Recalls Salt Rock Lamps Due to Shock and Fire Hazards. The dimmer switch and/or outlet plug can overheat and ignite, posing shock and fire hazards.
Bicycles Recalled by Nirve Sports; Stem Failure Poses Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Nirve Sports Ltd., of Huntington Beach, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 120 Cannibal Bicycles. The bicycle stem can crack and cause the rider to lose control, posing a risk of serious injury if the rider falls.
Polaris Recalls Ranger Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles Due to Loss of Control and Crash Hazard. The ROV's throttle can fail to work properly, which can cause the rider to lose control and crash.
Musical Wooden Table Toys Recalled by Battat Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Battat Inc., of Plattsburgh, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 14,000 Musical Wooden Table Toys. Small pegs on the xylophone toy can loosen and detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC and Cannondale Announce Recall of Cycling Shoes. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cannondale of Georgetown, Conn., is recalling 15,000 pairs of C-Soles cycling shoes because the cleats could pull out of the sole. This could cause a cyclist's foot to slip off the pedal, leading to an injury.
CPSC, Small Small World Announce Recall of "Egg Dippers" Easter Plush Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Small Small World, of Englewood, N.J. is voluntarily recalling about 75,000 "Egg Dippers" Easter Plush Toys. The toys' seams can separate and allow small beads to be released, presenting an aspiration hazard to young children.
CPSC, Mealane Corp. Announce Recall of Star Fire Sprinklers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Mealane Corp. of Philadelphia, Pa., is voluntarily recalling up to 1 million "Star" brand fire sprinklers manufactured from 1961 through 1976. These sprinklers could fail in a fire, exposing the public to bodily injury or death. These sprinklers have been installed nationwide, primarily in nursing homes. They also may be found in hospitals, schools, resorts, stores, office buildings, warehouses and supermarkets.
Krankcycle by Matrix with Detachable Seat Recalled by Johnson Health Tech Due to Fall Hazard. The seat on all Johnny G. Krankcycles by Matrix with detachable seats can unexpectedly come off of the cardio equipment's frame during use.
Briggs & Stratton Recalls Portable Generator Fuel Tank Replacement Caps, Due to Fire Hazard. The fuel tank replacement caps lack ventilation holes which allow pressure to build up in the fuel tank, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC and Kids II Announce Recall of SnackTime Stroller Toy Bar. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kids II of Alpharetta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 99,000 SnackTime Stroller Toy Bars, model number 669. A rattle attached to the bar can break open, releasing small beads. Children could inhale the beads into their lungs, causing serious injury.
American Honda Expands Recall of FourTrax ATVs Due to Crash Hazard. A weld on the ATV's front right and left upper suspension arms can separate, causing the driver to lose control of the vehicle, posing a crash hazard.
Robert Bosch Tool Corp. Recalls Skil® Circular Saws Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Robert Bosch Tool Corp., of Mount Prospect, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 811,000 Skil brand Circular Saws. The trigger switch on the circular saw can be locked on or the switch can be turned on without the use of the safety lock-out. This can cause unexpected operation of the saw, posing a risk of laceration.
Plastic Animals Distributed In Fast Food Firm's Food Promotion May Present Choking Hazard To Small Children. In cooperation with the Consumer. Product Safety Commission, Jack's Food Systems Inc., a fast food chain located in Alabama, Flordia, Georgia, Mississippi and Tennessee today announced a voluntary recall of small plastic animals because of the potential danger of choking to small children under 3 years of age.
Extension Cords Recalled by Raport. PRODUCT: Extension Cords - Raport Inc., of Levittown, Puerto Rico, is recalling about 4,800 extension cords sold only in Puerto Rico. These 12-foot extension cords have one plug and nine outlets in three groups of three brown plastic outlets. The cords also have a white on- off switch and green wire. The cords are packaged in cardboard sleeves with writing that states, in part, "12 Foot Tree Light Cord," "Put 9 Outlets in Your Tree" and "MADE IN CHINA." The sleeves also show the cords being used on a pine tree. Yazmia 1-2-3 Stores in Puerto Rico sold the cords from August 1998 through March 1999 for about $3.
CPSC, Charles Komar & Sons Inc. Announce Recall of Flammable Garments. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Charles Komar & Sons Inc. of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 6,800 fleece robes and lounge sets for women. The fabric, which fails to meet federal mandatory standards for fabric flammability, could ignite readily and presents a serious risk of burn injuries in violation of the federal Flammable Fabrics Act. Fabrics that do not comply with the standard typically burn faster than newspaper.
Hussong Manufacturing and American Flame Recall Three Gas Fireplaces, Fireplace Inserts Due to Explosion Hazard. The main control modules on Kozy Heat-, Ambiance- and Stellar Hearth-brand direct vent fireplaces and inserts can allow gas to be released and buildup in the burner area.
CPSC, PJ Toys Announce Recall of Children's Furniture Sold at Target. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), PJ Toys, of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 8,300 units of a variety of children's furniture, sold at Target stores. Some of the paint on this furniture contains lead, which is toxic if ingested by children. High levels of lead in paint violate the Consumer Product Safety Act.
Choking Hazard Prompts Rite-Aide Doll Recall. Rite-Aide Corporation, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, is voluntarily recalling "L'il Bonnie'n Beth" Style No. 303 which are dolls (white or black) seated in a pull-toy car. Some of the dolls' arms and legs can come off and may cause choking in young children.
WRK Enterprises Recalls Edge and HOG Buoyancy Control Devices Due to Drowning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, WRK Enterprises dba Edge Dive Gear of Macon, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 750 (in the U.S.) and 20 (in Canada), Edge and HOG (Highly Optimized Gear) Buoyancy Control Devices (BCD). The spring in the over pressure valve can corrode and break preventing the buoyancy control device from retaining air, posing a drowning hazard to consumers.
American Suzuki Motor Corp. Recalls QuadSport ATVs Due to Crash Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Suzuki Motor Corporation, is voluntarily recalling about 1,350 Suzuki QuadSport ATVs. The regulator/rectifier circuit board can fail and cause the engine to stall during riding due to an insufficient battery charge, increasing the risk of a crash.
MAAX Spas Recalls Hot Tubs and Swim Spas Due to Fire Hazard. The UV generator inside the hot tub and swim spa can ignite while in use, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Delta Enterprise Corp. Announce Recall of Certain Cribs Sold at Toys R Us Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Delta Enterprise Corp., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 335 Lov's "Europa" Natural Color Cribs. The crib's paint contains high levels of lead. Lead poisoning in children is associated with behavioral problems, learning disabilities, hearing problems and growth retardation.
Primo Recalls Beverage Dispensers Due to Burn Hazard. Hot water can drip from the machine when it is used in high altitude areas over 6,000 feet in elevation, posing a burn hazard to users.
Fireworks Over America Recalls Fireworks Due to Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Fireworks Over America, of Springfield, Mo., is voluntarily recalling about 84,250 Oh Chute Parachute with Streamer Fireworks. The parachutes can become entangled in overhead power lines causing a shock hazard to users and bystanders.
S.R. Smith Recalls Pool Lifts Due to Fall Hazard. Welds securing the lift base plate and/or mast can break, posing a fall hazard.
Retrofit Program Announced For Spring Exercisers. Dynamic Classics, Ltd. of New York City, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), today announced a repair program for its spring exercisers called the "Rowing Action Exerciser." Early models of the exerciser were involved in injuries resulting mainly from the spring breaking or the footbar separating during use. Some two million exercisers of the earlier model were sold nationwide from 1984 to August 1987.
CPSC, Syntace USA Announce Recall of Bicycle Handlebar Stems. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Syntace USA, of Olney, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 2,300 F99 (Force 99) Bicycle Handlebar Stems. The recalled bicycle stems can crack or break under normal conditions, causing the rider to fall and suffer serious injury.
Zenital, Inc. Recalls 16-Inch Sidewalk Bicycles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Zenital, Inc. of El Monte, CA is voluntarily recalling about 7,900 16-inch model B-1601, Zenital sidewalk bicycles with training wheels. The bicycles are equipped with handbrakes, but no footbrakes and lack handlebar stem insertion marks.
Salsa Cycles Recalls Bicycle Forks Due to Fall Hazard. The bicycle fork can bend above the disc brake mount, posing a fall hazard to the rider.
IKEA Home Furnishings Announce Recall to Repair Folding Chair Beds and Sofa Beds for Finger Tip Amputation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IKEA Home Furnishings, of Plymouth Meeting, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 100,000 LYCKSELE Chair Beds and Sofa Beds. Fingers can become caught in the folding mechanism of the chair bed/sofa bed, posing a laceration and/or amputation hazard.
CPSC, GapKids Announce Recall of Girls' Straw Cowboy Hats. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), GapKids, of San Francisco, Calif. is voluntarily recalling 5,200 girl's straw cowboy hats. The straw hat is constructed using a thin wire within a seam. The tip of the wire can break free from the seam, posing a laceration hazard.
Walgreen Co. Recalls Its Electric Potpourri Pots. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Walgreen Company, Deerfield, IL, is voluntarily recalling approximately 14,400 electric potpourri pots sold at Walgreen stores prior to June 1, 1992. The potpourri pots present an electric shock hazard to the user if a metal heating element retaining bar inside the sealed base of the pot comes in contact with the unit's power cord terminals. This could permit metal nuts on the outside bottom of the pot to become electrically charged.
Fred’s Recalls Charcoal Grills Due to Fire Hazard. The exterior paint on the grill can ignite, posing a fire hazard.
My Way Corp. Recalls Baby Walkers Due to Stairway Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), My Way Corp., of San Juan, Puerto Rico, is voluntarily recalling about 800 Baby Walkers. The walkers violate the baby walker voluntary standard and can fit through a standard doorway and are not designed to stop at the edge of a step. Babies using these walkers can be seriously injured or killed.
Strangulation Death of a Child Prompts Recall to Repair Roman Shades by All Strong Industry. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), All Strong Industry (USA) Inc., of Ontario, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 290,000 Roman Shades. Strangulations can occur when a child places his/her neck between the exposed inner cord and the fabric on the backside of the blind or when a child pulls the cord out and wraps it around his/her neck.
Novelty "Tractor Trailer" Cigarette Lighters Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), GOLDEN APPLE XXCO., Industry, CA, is voluntarily recalling novelty cigarette lighters in the shape of tractor trailer trucks. The lighters, complete with five pairs of tiny wheels on one edge and a picture of a tractor trailer on the side are very attractive to children and may invite play. If a child plays with the lighter, a fire and/or serious burn injuries may result.
KTM North America Recalls Motocross Competition Off-Road Motorcycles Due to Crash Hazard. The connecting rod in the crankshaft assembly can fracture, causing the operator to lose control of the motorcycle and crash.
Toy Drums Recalled by The Boyds Collection Ltd. Due to Lead Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Boyds Collection Ltd., of McSherrystown, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 4,500 Eli's Small Drums and Liberty's Large Drums. The red paint on the drums contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
CPSC, SRAM Corp. Announce Recall of Bicycle Chains. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), SRAM Corp., of Chicago, Ill., is recalling about 25,000 Sachs bicycle chains. The chains can break, causing the rider to lose control of the bicycle, fall and be injured.
"Support Sack" And "Cozy Cushion" Bean Bag Infant Cushions Recalled Because Of Suffocation Risk. Gold, Inc., Denver, CO, and Pinky Baby Products, Houston, TX, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, are voluntarily recalling their firms' infant bean bag cushions because of a suffocation risk. These firms have sold approximately 146,000 cushions since 1988. The Commission has received 19 reports that an infant was found dead lying face-down on an infant bean bag cushion. None of the reported deaths involves products sold by Gold, Inc. or Pinky Baby Products.
CPSC, Duracraft Announce Recall of Portable Baseboard Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Duracraft Corp. of Southborough, Mass., is recalling about 50,000 portable baseboard heaters. The fan of the model CZ-520 heater could become stuck causing it to overheat, posing a fire hazard.
Mattel Puts Safety Labels On Toys. Mattel, Inc., Hawthorne, California, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today announced that it has initiated a voluntary program of attaching labels on warehouse inventories of certain of its Battlestar Galactica line of space toys.
Fujifilm Recalls Power Adapter Wall Plugs Sold with Digital Cameras Due to Shock Hazard. The power adapter wall plug can crack, break or detach and remain in the wall and expose live electrical contacts, posing a shock hazard.
Marshall Group Recalls Marshall Gardens PatioGlo Bio-Fuel Gel Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Marshall Group, of Elkhart, Ind., is voluntarily recalling about 39,000 bottles of Marshall Gardens PatioGlo Bio-Fuel Gel. The pourable gel fuel can ignite unexpectedly to the consumer and expel onto people and objects nearby when it is poured into a firepot that is still burning. This hazard can occur if the consumer does not see the flame or is not aware that the firepot is still ignited. Gel fuel that expels and ignites can pose fire and burn risks to consumers that can be fatal.
Guidecraft Inc. Recalls Children's Puppet Theaters Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Guidecraft Inc., of Englewood, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 10,000 Floor Puppet Theaters. Surface paints on the puppet theater's wooden panels contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
CPSC Issues Warning About Hazardous Red Devil Gas Grills. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is warning consumers about 155,000 Red Devil gas grills manufactured by e4L Inc., of Encino, Calif., and, Quantum North America Inc., of Encino, Calif. The product's design allows consumers to light the grill at an air intake tube, instead of at the burner. Though the grill appears to function normally, gas inside the air intake tube ignites. The tube can reach temperatures of up to 750 degrees Fahrenheit and present a burn hazard to consumers. In some earlier grills, the heat produced by lighting the grill at the air intake tube damaged the plastic support piece, and caused the grill to fall to the ground. When it collapses, flames from the grill can burn nearby consumers and ignite surrounding combustibles.
CPSC, Schutt Manufacturing Co. Announce Recall of Baseball and Softball Training Aids. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Schutt Manufacturing Co., of Litchfield, Ill., is announcing the recall of about 12,000 Baseball Striker and Softball Striker batting aids. During normal use, the ball can become separated from its cable when struck with a bat, and cause serious injuries to users and bystanders.
Yamaha Motor Corporation U.S.A. Recalls Rhino Side-by-Side Vehicles Due to Risk of Brake Failure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Yamaha Motor Corporation U.S.A., of Cypress, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 7,800 Model Year 2008 Rhino YXR450 and YXR700 Side-by-Side Vehicles. The brake caliper on the left front wheel could have been made incorrectly, resulting in brake fluid leaking. This can cause a loss of braking and control of the vehicle, posing a serious safety risk to the driver and passenger.
Granada Electronics Inc. Recalls Omnidirectional CB Antenna. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Granada Electronics Inc., Brooklyn, NY is voluntarily recalling its Model M400 Omnidirectional CB base station antennas. If contact is made by the antennas with an electrical power line while being installed or taken down, the antennas have the potential for severe or fatal shock.
Brown Jordan Services Recalls Swivel Patio Chairs Due to Fall Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Sears.com. The base of the chair can break during normal use, posing a fall hazard to users.
CPSC And IBM Announce Recall Program To Repair 9527 Series Color Monitor. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the IBM Personal Computer Company of Somers, N.Y. is announcing a program to repair 56,000 color computer monitors. Some of the monitors may have been incorrectly assembled and, if not properly grounded, may pose a shock hazard.
CPSC, Kodak Announce Recall of AC Adapters for Digital Cameras. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Eastman Kodak Company, of Rochester, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling 120,000 AC adapters for use with certain Kodak digital cameras. When the connector plug of the AC adapter is not fully inserted in the camera, the batteries in the camera can overheat to a high temperature. This can cause the batteries to leak acid and explode, possibly causing thermal and chemical burns or lacerations to consumers.
Popkiller Recalls USB Chargers, Adapters and Cables Due to Fire and Electric Shock Hazards. Mounted plug blades, and inadequate electronic circuitry create a fire and electrical shock hazard to consumers.
Bugaboo Car Seat Adapter Recalled Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Bugaboo Americas, of El Segundo, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 64,000 Car Seat Adapters. When the adapter is used on a stroller that also has a wheeled board accessory attached for transporting a standing toddler, and the car seat is positioned so the child faces forward, the car seat can disconnect from the adapter and fall.
CPSC and EV Global Motors Co. Announce Recall of Lithium Batteries in Electric Bikes. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), EV Global Motors Co., of North Hills, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 2,000 lithium batteries in Mini E-Bike electric bicycles. The lithium ion batteries in these bicycles can overheat and pose a fire hazard.
Positec Tool Recalls Worx Brand Blower/Vacs Due to Shock Hazard. The grounded and ungrounded wiring in the electric blower/vacs could be reversed.
CPSC, Hitachi Cable Manchester Inc. Announce Recall of 25- and 50-Pair Plenum Network Cables. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hitachi Cable Manchester (HCM), Inc. of Manchester, N.H., is voluntarily recalling about 1.7 million feet of 25- and 50-pair, category 5 and 5e, CMP cable used to connect computer and electronic equipment, typically in data centers. The recalled cables do not meet the fire resistance standards for cable used in plenum applications. A plenum is the space typically used for air circulation in heating and air conditioning systems. If the cables were exposed to a fire source, smoke or fire could spread more quickly than permitted by the standard for this type of cable. This recall is only for certain CMP cables used in plenum (air duct) applications. CMP cables used in riser (non-plenum) applications are not included in this recall.
CPSC, InSTEP LLC Announce Recall of Trailer Bikes. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, (CPSC), InSTEP LLC, of Mendota Heights, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 4,300 Hitchhiker III Trailer Bikes. The bike's universal joint system can fail, causing a rider to lose control of the bike. This poses a risk of injury to either of the two riders.
CPSC, Cannondale Bicycle Corporation Announce Recall of Bicycle Suspension Seat Posts. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cannondale Bicycle Corporation, of Bethel, Conn.  is recalling about 1,480 1-X Bicycle Suspension Seat Posts. The seat posts may have been improperly manufactured, which could cause the seat post to fail prematurely. A failure could lead to a crack in the bicycle seat post, which may cause the rider to fall or crash.
CPSC, Profile-Design LLC Announce Recall of Bicycle "Aero Bars". In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Profile-Design LLC, of Long Beach Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 8,400 "aero bars" used on racing bicycles. The aero bars are handlebar extensions that either mount in the center of the handlebars or are sold as a complete handlebar and stem system. The aero bars allow riders to ride in an aerodynamic crouching position. The brackets that attach the aero bars' forearm pads, where riders rest their arms, can loosen or separate during use, causing the rider to lose control and crash.
Four-Wheeled Ride-On Vehicles Recalled by Razor USA Due to Throttle Controller Defect. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Razor USA LLC, of Cerritos, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 30,000 Razor Dirt Quad Electric Powered Ride-On Vehicles. The control module for the throttle can fail and cause the electric ride-on vehicle to unexpectedly surge forward, posing a risk of injury to the user or a bystander.
CPSC and CESSO, LLC Announce Recall of Tree Stand Components. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), CESSO, LLC, of Cumming, Ga., is voluntarily recalling "Tree Lounge" Tree Stand Levelers. If the "Tree Lounge" is subjected to significant impact from a heavy load, a tube on the leveler can crack. If the leveler is installed beneath the "Tree Lounge," the bolts attaching the leveler to the "Tree Lounge" can bend or begin to pull through the leveler. In either of these circumstances, users can lose their balance and possibly fall.
Ignite Recalls Kids Straw Tumblers Due to Risk of Ingestion. If a child chews on the drinking straw, small pieces can break off into the child's mouth, posing a risk of ingestion or aspiration of the small part.
Arctic Cat Recalls Snowmobiles Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Arctic Cat Inc., of Thief River Falls, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 Arctic Cat Snowmobiles. Oil can leak into the engine compartment, posing a fire hazard to consumers. In addition, the fuel tank can come into contact with the engine posing a possibility of wearing through and fuel leakage.
Taphandles Recalls Ceramic Beer Tap Handles Due to Laceration Hazard. The custom-made beer tap handles can break during normal use.
Arctic Cat Recalls Snowmobiles Due to Crash, Injury Hazards (Recall Alert). The brakes can fail, posing a risk of injury or death to the operator.
CPSC, Ariens Co. Announce Recall of Lawn Mowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ariens Co., of Brillion, Wis., is recalling about 40,000 walk-behind lawn mowers sold under the Ariens, Scotts, and Husqvarna brand names. The piece attaching the blade to the mower can crack and break off. The broken piece or the blade can be propelled from underneath the mower, possibly injuring the operator or a bystander.
Metabo Recalls Rat Tail Angle Grinders Due to Laceration Hazard. The on-off switch can lock in the “on” position, posing a laceration hazard to consumers.
McCrory Stores, Inc. Recalls Toy Car Because Of Choking Hazard. McCrory Stores, Inc. of York, PA is voluntarily recalling approximately 3,800 "Spring N' Bounce Car" toys, items #8941 and 8941S, because of small parts which could detach and become a choking hazard to young children. This recall is being conducted in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).
CPSC, BJ Alan Co. Announce Recall of Mammoth Smoke Fountain Fireworks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BJ Alan Co., of Youngstown, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 Mammoth Smoke Fountains. The device can unexpectedly propel on the ground or unintentionally explode during use, posing a risk of burn injuries to consumers.
Dell Recalls Hybrid Power Adapters Sold with Power Banks Due to Shock Hazard. The hybrid power adapter casing can break and detach, exposing the internal metal components, posing an electric shock hazard.
CPSC and Visioneer, Inc. Announce Software and Hardware Correction Program for Computer Scanners. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Visioneer, Inc. is announcing a voluntary correction program for approximately 150,000 computer scanners sold under the names PaperPort Vx, Hewlett-Packard ScanJet 4s, and Compaq Scanner Keyboard. If the scanner's power supply is momentarily decreased, the scanner's motor can lock and may overheat.
"Cars" Toy Chests Sold at Toys "R" Us Recalled by Delta Enterprise Due to Lead Poisoning Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Delta Enterprise Corp., New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 "Cars" Toy Storage Benches. The red paint on the partition panels of the toy box contains high levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Kawasaki Motors Corp. U.S.A. Recalls Off-Road Motorcycles Due to Frame Failure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kawasaki Motors Corp. U.S.A., of Irvine, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 200 Kawasaki KLX140 Off-Road Motorcycles. One or more of the motorcycle's frame welds could be missing or made incorrectly allowing the frame to crack or break, posing a risk of serious injury to riders.
Mirraco Recalls Bicycles Due to Wheel Fork Failure Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Mirraco LLC, of Carlsbad, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 11,000 Mirraco Bicycles. The front wheel forks on these bicycles could have been welded improperly. This poses a risk that the weld could fail, and the rider could lose control and fall.
Masterfoods USA Recalls M&M'S® Menorah for Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Masterfoods USA, of Hackettstown, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 1,008 M&M'S Brand Menorahs. If a candle burns all the way down, the plastic Menorah could ignite and present a fire hazard.
SRAM Recalls Bicycle Gear Hubs Due to Crash and Injury Hazards. The brakes in the gear hubs can fail, posing crash and injury hazards to the rider.
Homelite, Husky and Black Max Generators Recalled Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Home Depot and Sam's Club Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Homelite Consumer Products Inc., of Anderson, S.C., is voluntarily recalling about 51,750 Homelite, Husky and Black Max Brand Generators. The fuel gauge can leak excessive amounts of gasoline, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Paging Loudspeakers Recalled By TOA Electronics Due to Risk of Impact Injury. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, TOA Electronics Inc., of Burlingame, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 2,600 Paging Horn Loudspeakers. The speaker housing can crack at the mounting bracket, causing the speakers to fall from their mounting. This poses a risk of injury from impact to consumers. Higher failure rates have occurred in high temperature and humidity environments.
Flame Weeders Recalled by Gardener's Supply Co. Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gardener's Supply Co., of Burlington, Vt., is voluntarily recalling about 2,000 Flame Weeders. The two-piece brass control valve can separate between the flame weeder and the propane tank and allow propane to leak from the tank. This poses fire and burn hazards to consumers.
Fujitsu Recalls Battery Packs for Fujitsu Notebook Computers and Workstations Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. The lithium-ion battery packs can overheat, posing burn and fire hazards to consumers.
CPSC, Cooper Hand Tools Announce Recall of Weller® Heating Element used in Soldering Irons. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cooper Hand Tools, of Apex, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 890 Weller Brand Heating Elements. The housing of the heating element can unexpectedly leak hot metal, posing a serious risk of a burn injury to the user.
Samson International Recalls Bar Stool Due to Fall Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Costco. The footrest can crack, compromising the strength and stability of the bar stool, posing a fall hazard.
Children's Hooded Sweatshirts Recalled by Seventy Two Inc. Due to Strangulation Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Nordstrom Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Seventy Two Inc., of La Puente, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1,800 Bonafide Love Hooded Children's Sweatshirts. The garments have a drawstring through the hood, which can pose a strangulation hazard to children. In February 1996, CPSC issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled on the neck and waist by drawstrings in upper garments, such as jackets and sweatshirts.
Merck Recalls Temodar and Temozolomide Bottles with Cracked Caps Due to Failure to Meet Child-Resistant Closure Requirement. The bottle cap can be cracked which can cause the child-resistant closure  to become ineffective to young children who can gain unintended access to the  capsules, posing a risk of poisoning.
Rocky Mountain Recalls Bicycles with Front Disc Brakes to Replace Quick Release Lever Due to Crash Hazard. An open quick release lever on the bicycle’s front wheel hub can come into contact with the front disc brake assembly.
Canon Recalls for Repair EOS Rebel T4i Digital Cameras Due to Risk of Allergic Reaction. A chemical in the camera's rubber grips can irritate the skin
CPSC, TSI Prime Inc. Announce Recall of Ceiling Light Fixtures. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), TSI Prime Inc., of Coppell, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 126,000 ceiling-mounted light fixtures. The light fixtures can short circuit, posing a fire hazard.
Toro Recalls Zero Turn Riding Mowers Due to Fire Hazard. The idler pulley on Z Master mowers can rub against the fuel tank. This is the second recall of these lawn mowers.
CPSC Announces Consent Agreement With Manufacturers And Distributors Of Aluminum Baseball Bats. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission announced today approval of a settlement agreement between the Commission's Bureau of Compliance and respondents in the Aluminum Baseball Bats Enforcement Proceeding, CPSC Docket Nos. 75-9, 75-10, 75-11, 75-12, 75-13, and 75-14.
RH Baby & Child Recalls Mobiles Due to Choking Hazard (Recall Alert). The wheels on the mobile’s hanging cars can detach and fall, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Wood Abacus Recalled by LTD Commodities LLC Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LTD Commodities LLC and ABC Distributing, of Bannockburn, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 Wood Abacus activity centers. The wooden rods on the abacus can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Snowmobiles Recalled by Polaris Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). A weld on the steering post can separate, resulting in loss of steering control, posing a crash hazard.
Core Health & Fitness Recalls Stairmaster Stepmill Exercise Equipment Due to Fall Hazard (Recall Alert). The steps can accelerate rapidly without input from the user, posing a fall hazard.
Women's Scarves Recalled by Zazou Scarves Due to Burn Hazard; Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The sheer 100% silk scarves fail the federal flammability standard for wearing apparel and pose a risk of burn injury.
CPSC, The Lakeside Collection Announce Recall of Kid's Tent Set. The Lakeside Collection, of Lincolnshire, Ill. is voluntarily recalling approximately 1,500 3-Piece Kid's Tent Sets. The tent set consists of an "igloo," "tee pee," and connecting tunnel. Only the connecting tunnel is being recalled. They are mostly red, blue and yellow and were sold by The Lakeside Collection from May 2002 through November 2002 for about $23. The tent sets were manufactured in China. The modified tunnel has a separate tag that reads: "REPLACEMENT TUNNEL."
Locker Brand Recalls Rx Lockers Due to Failure Leading to Allowing Unauthorized Access to Medicine Containers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Locker Brand Inc. of Henderson, Nev., is voluntarily recalling about 59,600 medicine bottle storage containers. The medicine container can open by applying pressure to the latch when it is locked. This could result in unauthorized access to medicine bottles in the container.
CPSC, Candlewick Press Announce Recall of Children's Board Books. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Candlewick Press of Cambridge, Mass., is recalling about 78,670 "Bunny My Honey" children's board books printed in Italy. The plastic lamination on the board book may peel off, posing a choking hazard for young children.
Children's Plush Books Recalled by Simon & Schuster Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Simon & Schuster Inc., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 142,000 Monday the Bullfrog Plush Books. The plastic eye on the frog can detach, which may pose a choking hazard to young children.
Digital Clamp Meters Recalled by Fluke Due to Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Fluke Corp., of Everett, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 52,000 Fluke Digital Clamp Meters. The meters can fail to give an appropriate voltage reading, resulting in the operator falsely believing the electrical power is off, posing a shock, electrocution, or thermal burn hazard.
TJ Power Sports Recalls Dune Buggies Due To Ejection Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), TJ Power Sports LLC, of Irving, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 400 Twister Hammerhead Dune Buggies. The seat belt adjustment for the shoulder buckle can break during impact or stress, posing an ejection and injury hazard to driver and passenger.
The Home Depot Recalls Candle Holders Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Home Depot, of Atlanta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 14,000 Candle Holders. Sunlight passing through the glass portion can cause nearby flammable materials to ignite, posing a fire hazard.
Basketball-Shaped Chair and Ottoman Sets Recalled by Colleen Karis Designs Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard; Sold at HomeGoods Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Colleen Karis Designs LLC, of Los Angeles, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 380 All-Star Basketball Chair and Ottoman Sets. Surface paints on the lettering on both sides of the basketball chair could contain excessive levels of lead which is a violation of the federal lead paint standard.
SmartSpark Energy Systems Recalls Battery Equalizers Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), SmartSpark Energy Systems Inc., of Champaign, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 800 BattEQ Battery Equalizers. The recalled equalizers can overheat, posing a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Murray Inc. Announce Recall of Riding Lawn Mowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, (CPSC), Murray Inc. of Brentwood, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 89,500 rear-engine riding lawn mowers and about 6,200 mid-engine riding mowers. The fuel tank can crack and leak fuel, posing a burn or fire hazard to consumers.
Flowers By Zoe Recalls Girls Striped Hoodie and Neon Tie Dye Jacket Due to Strangulation Hazard. The hoodies and jackets have drawstrings around the neck area which pose a  strangulation hazard to children.
Power Adapters Sold with LectroFan Sound Machines Recalled by ASTI Due to Shock Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Amazon.com (Recall Alert). The casing on the power adapter can break when plugged into an electrical outlet, exposing its metal prongs, posing an electrical shock hazard.
CPSC and BSH Home Appliances Corp. Announce Recall to Repair 45 Inch Electric Cook Tops. BSH Home Appliances Corp., of Huntington Beach, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 330 electric cook tops. The recalled electric cook tops were sold under the "Thermador" brand name and have the model number TMH45PS and serial numbers ranging from 82030001 through 82070100. The model number and serial number can be found inside the cook top, under the hinged top. The recalled stainless steel cook tops are 45 inches wide, have four coil elements, and a griddle/grill. Appliance and specialty stores nationwide sold the cook tops from March 2002 through September 2002 for between $1,000 and $1,100.
Second Death Moves Sears To Step Up Brawny Bed Recall. As a result of a second fatal accident involving a Brawny bunk bed, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission announced that Sears, Roebuck and Co. is notifying customers of the availability of a free safety modification kit for the beds.
Children's Pencil Pouches Recalled by Raymond Geddes & Co. Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Raymond Geddes & Co., of Baltimore, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 84,200 Children's Pencil Pouches. The paint on the pencil pouches' zipper pulls contains excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
UberScientific Recalls Topical Anesthetic Due to Failure to Meet Child Resistant Closure Requirement; Risk of Poisoning. The packaging is not child resistant as required by the Poison Prevention Packaging Act. The pain relieving cream and spray contain lidocaine, posing a risk of poisoning to young children if they put it on their skin or ingest it.
Bernhardt Recalls Dressers and Nightstands Due to Serious Tip-Over Hazard. The recalled dressers are unstable if they are not properly anchored to the wall.
Firm To Provide Guard For String Trimmer. Weed Eater is voluntarily offering a free muffler guard kit to reduce chance of muffler burns to consumers using certain gasoline powered string trimmers sold under the brand names of Weed Eater, Yard Pro and Sears Craftsman.
Pop Up Phone Recalled; Antenna Is Choking Hazard. "Pop Up Answer Phone" model #1808-0, a Larami pre-school toy, is being recalled by the manufacturer because an antenna piece may separate from the toy telephone receiver and cause a potential choking hazard for young children. Larami Corporation, of Philadelphia, PA is recalling 20,000 of the toy telephones sold nationwide in 1987 for about $10.
CPSC, The Body Shop U.S. Announce Recall of Scented Jewel Candles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the Body Shop, of Wake Forest, N.C., is recalling approximately 25,000 scented "Jewel" candles. The glass pots of these candles can explode or break, causing possible cuts to nearby consumers, and posing a fire hazard. The outer decorative covering of these pots can melt or catch fire.
Under Armour Recalls Athletic Cups Due To Injury Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Under Armour Inc, of Baltimore, Maryland, is voluntarily recalling about 211,000 Under Armour Athletic Cups. The cups can break if hit, posing a risk of serious injury hazard to athletes.
Hedstrom Offers Fuse Protector Kit For "Probe VI" Battery-Powered Riding Toy. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Hedstrom Corporation, Bedford, Pennsylvania, is voluntarily repairing the wiring harness in approximately 30,000 Hedstrom Probe VI battery-powered riding toys manufactured prior to June 1985 without fuses. The Commission and Hedstrom are aware of eight reported incidents in which these vehicles have caught fire. One of these incidents resulted in a serious fire in a mobile home. Fire can occur either while the toy is being stored or while it is being ridden by a child.
Small World Toys Recalls Toy Vehicles for Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Small World Toys, of Culver City, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 92,300 vehicles in the IQ Baby Pillow Soft Activity Blocks, IQ Baby Traveling' Train Blocks, IQ Baby Vroom Vroom Vehicles and Discovery Channel Vroom Vroom Vehicles. The plastic wheels on the toys can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
TenPoint Crossbow Technologies Recalls to Repair Crossbows Due to Injury Hazard. After the safety has been re-engaged, the crossbows can fire under certain circumstances if a consumer pulls the trigger, posing an injury hazard.
Waterway Plastics Recalls Certain Drain Covers Due to Incorrect Ratings. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Waterway Plastics, of Oxnard, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 50,850 pool drain covers. The recalled drain covers were incorrectly rated to handle the flow of water through the cover, which could pose a possible entrapment hazard to swimmers and bathers.
CPSC, LPK International Announce Recall of Barstools. LPK International Inc., of Northbrook, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 1,900 barstools. This recall includes 24- inch and 29-inch high, natural wood finish barstools with round seats. The barstools have model numbers 74150 (24-inch) and 75151 (29-inch). The model numbers are printed on a sticker on the underside of the barstool's seat. A circular stamp on the underside of the seat reads, "H.L." and "NOV 2001." Shopko Stores sold the barstools in central and northwest U.S. from January 2002 through March 2002 for about $20. They were assembled in the United States.
CPSC, Megatech Announce Recall of Rechargeable Battery Packs for Radio Controlled Airplanes. Megatech of North Bergen, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 3,000 rechargeable, NiMh battery packs used with certain Megatech radio-controlled airplanes. These battery packs were included with Skyliner model radio-controlled airplanes. They are 7 cell, 8.4V battery packs and are covered in a light green plastic. They measure 1 1/4-inches wide, 3 7/8-inches long, and 1/2-inches thick. Airplanes with the recalled batteries were sold by Hammacher Schlemmer nationwide from December 2000 to March 2001 for a suggested retail price between $224 and $300. The batteries were also sold separately for approximately $36. The batteries were made in China and the battery packs were assembled in Taiwan.
Aquarium Power Head Recall. Some 42,000 aquarium Power Heads (Model 200) are being voluntarily recalled by the Rolf C. Hagen (USA) Corporation of Mansfield, Mass., because they may present a fatal shock hazard to consumers. Water may seep into the motor winding terminals, allowing water in the aquarium to become energized.
CPSC, DESA Heating Products Announce Recall of Compact Gas Fireplaces. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), DESA Heating Products, of Bowling Green, Ky., is voluntarily recalling 534 "Vanguard" and "FMI" Compact Fireplaces. The burner tube connection to the gas valve can leak gas when the main burner is on. This leaking gas can ignite, causing a minor flare-up, which could cause nearby combustibles to ignite.
Frozen Carbonated Beverage Dispensers Recalled by IMI Cornelius Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IMI Cornelius, of Osseo, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 8,000 Frozen Carbonated Drink Dispensers. A problem with the dispenser's florescent lamp can cause electrical arcing, which poses a fire hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Jakks Pacific Inc. Announce Recall to Replace Certain Cans of "Smatter" Spray Foam. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jakks Pacific Inc., of Malibu, California is voluntarily recalling approximately 296,000 cans of its aerosol "Smatter" spray foam. If the pressurized can is left in a hot automobile, it can forcefully break apart and cause injury to a nearby consumer.
Risk of Strangulation Prompts Recall to Repair Roman Shades by Ethan Allen. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Ethan Allen Global Inc., of Danbury, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 163,000 Roman Shades. Strangulation can occur when a child places his/her neck between the exposed inner cord and the fabric on the backside of the shade or when a child pulls the cord out and wraps it around his/her neck. Also, strangulation can occur when a child's neck become entangled on the free-standing loop.
CAMP USA Recalls Tour Nanotech Crampons Due to Fall Hazard. The heel bail, which connects the ankle strap to the crampon, can detach from the crampon, posing a fall hazard.
CPSC and Global Industries, Inc. Announce Recall for Home Repair of Executive Chair. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Global Industries, Inc. of Marlton, N.J., is announcing a program to replace the bases on approximately 7,000 Executive Hi-back Tilter Chairs. If consumers lean far forward in the chair, it may tip over.
Boys' Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by Siegfried & Parzifal Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Siegfried & Parzifal Inc., of City of Industry, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 5,000 Karl Kani Boys' Fleece Hoody Sweatshirts. The garments have a drawstring through the hood which poses a strangulation hazard to children.
Vornado Air Reannounces Recall of Electric Space Heaters Following Report of Death; Fire and Burn Hazards. The electric space heater can overheat when in use, posing fire and burn hazards.
BRP Recalls Ski-Doo Snowmobiles Due to Fire Hazard. The fuel pump fittings can make contact with the oil tank and break, causing a  fuel leak.
Teething Rings Recalled by Calisson Due to Ingestion Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Calisson Inc., of Dana Point, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 Cool-it Soothers by Vulli. If the teething ring is punctured, bacteria and mold can grow inside the teether's untreated liquid. This poses an ingestion hazard to infants and can lead to diarrhea and vomiting.
CPSC, Pottery Barn Kids Inc. Announce Recall of Bunk Beds. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Pottery Barn Kids Inc., of San Francisco, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 200 Stinson Bunk Beds. The side rail and guardrails on these beds can break, causing the bed to collapse and allowing childen to fall out of the beds.
Nordstrom Recalls Girls' Sandals Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Nordstrom Inc. of Seattle, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 1,500 Nordstrom's Cadence-Lea and Trio-Lea Girl's Sandals. The flower embellishments on the sandals can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Meijer Announce Recall of Children's Sweatshirts with Drawstring Hoods. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Meijer Distribution Inc., of Grand Rapids, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 18,655 Children's Sweatshirts. The sweatshirts have drawstrings in the hood. Children can get entangled and strangle in the drawstrings that can catch on playground equipment, fences or tree branches.
CPSC, Blue Coral Announce Recall of Rain-X® Glass Cleaner and Washer Fluid. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Blue Coral, of Cleveland, Ohio is voluntarily recalling about 1.1 million containers of Rain-X glass cleaner and washer fluid. The products, which contain methyl alcohol, are not sealed with child-resistant closures as required by federal law. Methyl alcohol, also known as methanol, is toxic and can cause blindness or death if ingested.
Polycom, Inc. Recalls Wireless Conference Phone Batteries Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Polycom, Inc., of Pleasanton, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 5,800 SoundStation2W Wireless Conference Phones with Lithium Ion Batteries. The battery packs can overheat, posing a fire or burn hazard.
CPSC, Schylling Associates Inc. Announce Recall of More "Jack-In-the-Box" Type Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Schylling Associates Inc. of Rowley Mass. is voluntarily recalling 14,400 "Jack-In-the-Box" Type Toys. The bead on the crank of the toy can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Tree Wound and Grafting Compound Recalled by the Tanglefoot Co.. Tree Wound and Grafting Compound - The Tanglefoot Co., of Grand Rapids, Mich., is recalling about 35,000 cans of Tree Wound and Grafting Compound, used to seal pruning cuts and other tree wounds. The product is sold in pint, quart and gallon cans that are labeled "Tanglefoot, Tree Wound & Grafting Compound." The recalled cans were filled from November 11, 1996, through May 5, 1999. This five-digit date (written as year, month, day) is stamped on the back of the can's label. For example, "81127" means the can was filled on November 27, 1998. Hardware stores and nurseries nationwide sold the compound from November 1996 through August 1999 for between $5 and $18, depending on the size of the can.
Black & Decker® Brand Toasters Recalled By Applica Consumer Products Inc. Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Applica Consumer Products Inc., of Miramar, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 70,000 Black & Decker brand Infrawave Toasters. An electrical component in the toaster can overheat and ignite the circuit board, posing a fire hazard.
Bodum Recalls Stove Top Espresso Makers Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. The espresso maker’s handle can ignite from the flame of a gas stove, posing fire and burn hazards.
General Electric Company Warns Of Nine Inch Fan Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, the General Electric Company (GE) warns consumers that its 1983 nine inch portable 2-speed oscillating fan, model F-l-OF-9A, presents a fire hazard. In the initial CPSC/GE news release of July 28, 1983, GE announced a recall program, indicating that fan overheating could result from a defective speed control switch, and warned that some fans could present a potential fire hazard.
Arctic Cat Recalls Snowmobiles Due to Crash Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Arctic Cat Inc., of Thief River Falls, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 19,000 Arctic Cat snowmobiles. The lower steering tie-rod attachment can loosen and cause loss of steering control, posing a crash hazard.
O'Neill Children's Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by La Jolla Sport Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jolla Sport USA Inc., of Irvine, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 2,300 Children's Hooded Fleece Sweatshirts. The recalled sweatshirts have a drawstring through the hood, which can pose a strangulation hazard to children. In February 1996, CPSC issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled on the neck and waist drawstrings in upper garments, such as jackets or sweatshirts.
Sevca LLC Recalls Sevylor® Tow Behinds; Quick Hitch Connectors Break, Posing Serious Hazard to Users. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sevca, LLC of Wichita, KS, is voluntarily recalling about 94,000 Sevylor Tow Behinds with Quick Hitch Connectors. The Quick Hitch, which connects the towable to the boat, can break and project pieces of the plastic Quick Hitch back towards the boat. If this occurs, an individual can be struck and seriously injured.
CPSC, Cressi-Sub Announce Recall of SCUBA Buoyancy Compensators. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cressi-sub USA, of Westwood, N.J. is recalling about 1,000 Cressi-sub Buoyancy Compensators. A slow leak from the shoulder exhaust caused by expansion of an internal cable housing could result in slow deflation. This could impact the diver's ability to control buoyancy.
FLOR' Inc. Recalls Carpet Tiles Due to Puncture Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), InterfaceFLOR LLC, LaGrange, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 24,000 Heartfelt Carpet Tiles. Pin-like needles can be embedded in the carpet tiles, posing a puncture wound hazard to consumers.
Coby Electronics Recalls Rechargeable Batteries Sold with Portable DVD/CD/MP3 Players Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Coby Electronics Corp., of Lake Success, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 13,000 Rechargeable Batteries sold with portable DVD/CD/MP3 players. The rechargeable batteries can overheat, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
American Honda Recalls Trimmers Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, American Honda Motor Company, of Torrance, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 14,000 (in the United States) and 3,600 (in Canada) grass trimmers. The shaft can crack and cause the lower gear case and cutting attachment to detach, posing a laceration hazard to the operator and bystanders.
Tippmann® A-5® Paintball Markers Recalled for Repair Due to Risk of Injury. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, in cooperation with Tippmann Sports LLC, of Fort Wayne, Ind., is voluntarily recalling about 13,000 Tippmann A-5 Paintball Markers. The end cap assembly on the rear of certain A-5 markers can break and eject during use, posing a risk of injury to the operator.
Chrome Shelving Recalled by King Long Metal Due to Injury Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Costco. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, King Long Metal Industrial Company, Ltd., of Trumbull, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 6,800 Six Tier Chrome Shelving Unit. Shelving unit casters can break at the stem causing the unit to collapse or fall, posing an injury hazard.
CPSC, CF Roark Welding & Engineering Announce Recall of Bicycle Frames. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), CF Roark Welding & Engineering Co. Inc., of Brownsburg, Ind., is voluntarily recalling 422 Titanium bicycle frame for road bicycles. The frames on these bicycles can crack and fail during use, posing a risk of injury to riders.
CPSC, Kolcraft Announce Recall of Tot Rider Walkers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kolcraft Enterprises, Inc., of Chicago, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 3,356 Tot Rider walkers. The cover on the walker's removable music center can break off, allowing small parts to fall from the product, creating a potential choking hazard to young children.
Second Recall Announced For Food Processor Bowl Covers. Consumers with certain Moulinex and Moulinex La Machine food processors are being asked by Regal Appliance Inc., of Virginia Beach, Virginia to replace their plastic bowl covers to reduce chances of a possible laceration hazard when the processor is being used.
Child Safety Latches and Outlet Covers Recalled by Prime-Line; Screw Breaks Can Allow Unintended Access. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Prime-Line, of Redlands, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 37,000 safety latches and outlet covers. The screws on the safety latches and outlet covers can loosen and/or break. When this happens, young children can gain access to electrical outlets and other potentially hazardous items.
CPSC, Celebrate Express Inc. Announce Recall of Magic Party Favors and Costume Shield. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Celebrate Express Inc., of Kirkland, Wash. is voluntarily recalling about 21,100 magic party favors and 25,500 costume shields. The magic party favors and the dragon ornament on the shield could break or crack, exposing sharp points that present a possible laceration hazard to children.
Adjmi Apparel Group Recalls Reebok Children's Windsuits for Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Adjmi Apparel Group, of New York, N.Y. (an authorized licensee of children's apparel products of Reebok International Ltd., of Canton, Mass.), is voluntarily recalling about 55,000 Reebok Children's Windsuits. The Reebok logo appliquΘ on the clear rubber zipper pull on the jacket can detach, posing a choking or aspiration hazard to young children.
West Music Recalls Shaker Guiro Instruments Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), West Music is voluntarily recalling about 6,500 Basic Beat Shaker Guiro Instruments. Surface paint on the recalled shaker guiro instrument contains excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
CPSC and The Mazel Co. Announce Teddy Bear Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Mazel Co. of Solon, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 835 Teddy Precious Indian girl and boy stuffed bears. The bears' Native American style clothing has beads on the headband and at the waist or neck. The beads can detach and young children can choke on the beads or inhale them into their lungs, which could lead to death.
Princeton Hosiery Mills Issues Warning On Plastic Ornaments On Infant Socks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Le-Roi, a division of Princeton Hosiery Mills, Princeton, Kentucky, issued a warning today to consumers concerning two styles of its infant socks because they may present a choking or aspiration hazard if the plastic ornaments which are small parts, detach from the socks. Neither CPSC or Le-Roi knows of any injuries involving these socks.
Haier America Recalls 42-inch LED-TVs Due to Risk of Injury. The support neck on the TV stand can break. If this happens the TV can fall. More than 180 cracks, breaks reported.
CPSC, Ace Novelty Urge Consumers To Remove Strap From Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Chairs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ace Novelty of Bellevue, Wash., is instructing consumers to remove the strap on 69,100 "Teenage Mutant Ninja" foam chairs. Children can become entangled and strangle in the strap.
Kmart Recalling Ceramic Potpourri House. Kmart Corporation, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, is voluntarily recalling an estimated 15,000 Ceramic Potpourri Houses, Item #32- 67-47, which sold for $5.97 at Kmart stores since June, 1989.
CE North America Recalls Fan Heaters Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Bed Bath & Beyond. The fan heaters can overheat, posing a fire hazard.
Fimco Offers Safety Tips For Electric Pressure Washers To Reduce Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Fimco, Inc., of Sioux City, Iowa, today announced that it will voluntarily provide safety kits to modify the handles of its approximately 14,150 electric pressure washers purchased before January 1984. The affected washers, which pump water under high pressure to clean porches, houses, motor vehicles, outdoor power equipment or farm equipment, were sold nationally under the "Big Butch" trade name by various retailers and under the Sears brand name through Sears catalogs.
CPSC, SCG Miyairi Announce Recall of Liquid Propane Overfill Protection Devices. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), SCG Miyairi (Thailand) Company, LTD, of Thailand, is voluntarily recalling about 21,000 SCG Liquid Propane Overfill Protection Devices (OPD valves). When the cylinder on the gas grill is filled to capacity and exposed to increased temperatures, liquid propane instead of gas vapor can leak out and cause the gas regulator valve to freeze. When the regulator valve thaws, if it has not been turned off, gas will flow to the grill.  The resulting build-up of gas in the grill can pose a serious fire hazard to consumers.
Foldable Steel Hammock Stand Sold at Lowe's Stores Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), L G Sourcing Inc., of North Wilkesboro, N.C., is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 Garden Treasures Foldable Steel Hammock Stands. The welds attaching the arms to the frame of the hammock stand can fail, allowing the hammock to fall. Users can be injured from falling to the ground, striking the hammock stand's base, or being struck by the arms of the hammock stand.
Jo-Ann Stores Expands Recall of Children's Toy Garden Tools Due to Violation of Lead in Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jo-Ann Stores Inc., of Hudson, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 97,000 Children's Toy Gardening Tools (an additional 16,000 toy rakes were recalled on September 26, 2007 and 6,000 toy watering cans on August 28, 2007). Surface paint on the handle of the toy gardening tools can contain excessive levels of lead paint, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Drone Nerds Recalls Self-Balancing Scooters/Hoverboards Due to Fire and Explosion Hazards. The lithium-ion battery packs in the self-balancing scooters/hoverboards can overheat, posing a risk of the products smoking, catching fire and/or exploding.
Albee Baby Recalls C & T International/Sorelle Brand "Prescott" Cribs Due to Entrapment, Suffocation and Fall Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Albee Baby, of East Rutherford, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 130 Sorelle brand "Prescott" fixed-sided cribs. These cribs are re-labeled fixed-sided Simplicity cribs that contain tubular metal mattress-support frames recalled in April 2010. The mattress support frames can bend or detach, causing part of the mattress to drop, creating a space into which an infant or toddler can roll and become wedged, entrapped or fall out of the crib.
JP Boden Recalls Children's Sandals Due to Fall Hazard (Recall Alert). The cork sole can detach from the sandal and cause a child to trip and fall.
IKEA Recalls Wardrobe Mirror Doors Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, IKEA North America Service, of Conshohocken, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 1,700 (in the United States) and 500 (in Canada) PAX AURLAND wardrobe mirror doors. The mirror glass can detach unexpectedly from the wardrobe door, fall and shatter, posing a laceration hazard to consumers.
ATVs Recalled By KTM North America Due to Brake Failure (Recall Alert). The following product safety recall was voluntarily conducted by the firm in cooperation with the CPSC. Consumers should stop using recalled products immediately unless otherwise instructed. It is illegal to resell or attempt to resell a recalled consumer product.
E-Z-GO Recalls Golf Cars, Shuttles and Off-Road Utility Vehicles Due to Crash Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, E-Z-GO, a Textron Company, of Augusta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 21,900 TXT golf cars, Cushman shuttle vehicles and Bad Boy off-road utility vehicles. The threaded end of the rack rod ball joint can break and the ball joint can become displaced, causing the driver to lose steering control. This can result in a crash.
Lamson & Sessions Recalls Floor Electrical Outlets Due to Shock or Electrocution Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lamson & Sessions, of Cleveland, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 100,000 Carlon® Drop-In Floor Boxes. The recalled floor boxes are wired incorrectly resulting in reverse polarity. This poses a shock or electrocution hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Pottery Barn Kids Announce Recall of Toy Chests. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Pottery Barn Kids of San Francisco, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about 5,800 Cameron Toy Chests. A problem with the lid support on the toy chest could cause the lid not to stay open, posing the risk of an impact injury to a child's head, fingers or hands.
CPSC, Gateway Announce Recall of Foam Rubber Toy Cows. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gateway Inc., of San Diego, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1 million foam rubber toy cows. Small pieces of these foam rubber cows can tear away, posing a serious choking hazard to young children.
Felt Bicycles Recalls Cyclocross Bicycles Due to Risk of Injury. The frame of the bicycle could break, causing the rider to lose control, fall and suffer injuries.
CPSC, Kohl's Department Stores Inc. Announce Recall of Children's Fleece Pant Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kohl's Department Stores Inc., of Menomonee Falls, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 9,600 children's fleece, two-piece pant sets. Small pieces of fabric at the end of the sleeves, along the hem and on the pockets of the tops can be torn off easily, posing a choking hazard.
CPSC, Geartec/Mackarl Announce Recall of Bicycle Helmets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Mackarl Enterprises Inc., of City of Industry, Calif. and KHS Bicycles Inc., of Rancho Dominquez, Calif. are voluntarily recalling 4,600 Bicycle Helmets. The helmets may not meet CPSC safety regulations for helmets, which poses a risk of a rider sustaining a serious head injury if he/she falls from a bicycle.
Fisher-Price Recalls Little People Wheelies Stand 'n Play Rampway Due to Choking Hazard. WASHINGTON, D.C. - The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, in cooperation with the firm named below, today announced a voluntary recall of the following consumer product. Consumers should stop using recalled products immediately unless otherwise instructed. It is illegal to resell or attempt to resell a recalled consumer product.
Bradshaw International Recalls Coffee Presses Due to Laceration Hazard. The glass beakers can break during normal use, posing a laceration hazard to users.
Road Bicycles Recalled by Specialized Bicycle Components. PRODUCT: Road Bicycles - Specialized Bicycle Components Inc., of Morgan Hill, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 4,000 Specialized 1999 Allez and Allez Sport model bicycles. The model "Allez" bicycles are blue and the model "Allez Sport" bicycles are orange. These bikes were sold through authorized Specialized dealers from October 1998 through June 1999 for between $1,000 and $2,000.
CPSC, Woods Industries Inc. Announce Recall of Voltage Testers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Woods Industries Inc., of Carmel, Ind., is recalling about 14,000 voltage testers. These testers could short circuit, causing possible shock, electrocution or burns.
Amprobe Recalls Clamp Meters Due to Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Amprobe Test Tools, of Everett, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 70,000 Amprobe Digital Clamp Meters used for electrical testing. The meters can fail to give an appropriate voltage reading, resulting in the operator believing the electrical power is off, which can pose a risk of shock, electrocution, or thermal burn hazard.
CPSC, Front Porch Classics Announce Recall of "Old Century Dread Pirate™" Coffee Table Games. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Front Porch Classics of Seattle, Washington, is voluntarily recalling Dread Pirate coffee table games. The surface coating and the metal in the ships contain lead and pose a risk of lead poisoning to young children. A child could ingest lead by swallowing a broken part of the ship or by repeatedly mouthing the ships.
Wal-Mart Recalls Charm Key Chains Due to Risk of Lead Exposure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wal-Mart Stores Inc., of Bentonville, Ark., is voluntarily recalling about 12,000 "Hip Charm" Key Chains. The charms on the key chain can contain high levels of lead, which is toxic if ingested and can cause adverse health effects.
Garbage Hauler Repairs Large Bins To Meet Federal Safety Standard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission has announced that a commercial refuse hauler in Florida has brought into compliance seven large unstable slant-sided metal refuse bins of the type that are banned by federal law because they have tipped over and crushed children.
Sump Pumps Pose Shock Hazard. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today announced that certain upright, pedestal sump pumps having solid black plastic float switches positioned on top of the pump motor may present an electric shock hazard.
L.L. Bean Recalls Toddler Sweater Fleece Pullovers Due to Choking Hazard (Recall Alert). The snaps on the fleece pullovers can detach, posing a choking hazard.
Philips Lighting Expands Recall of Metal Halide Lamps Due to Fire and Laceration Hazards. The outer bulbs can shatter, resulting in hot internal pieces of glass falling from the lamps, posing fire and laceration hazards.
Elkay Recalls Water Coolers and Bottle Filling Stations Due to Shock Hazard. Internal screws that secure the grounding wire can break and allow the grounding wire to become loose, posing a shock hazard.
Herman Miller Recalls Fiberglass Rocking Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. The rocker’s base can separate from the seat, posing a fall hazard.
Square D Recalls Safety Switches Due to Shock or Electrocution Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Square D Co., of Palatine, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 27,600 General Duty Safety Switches. The safety switch can continue to supply electricity even after being placed in the "OFF" position. This poses the risk of an electric shock or electrocution hazard to consumers.
Big Lots Stores, Inc. Recalls to Repair Bunk Beds Due to Collapse and Fall Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Big Lots Stores, Inc., of Columbus, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 20,000 Wooden Bunk Beds. The bunk beds' mattress support slats and side support railings can break, posing a risk of the bunk bed collapsing and a fall hazard to consumers.
Toysmith Recalls Toy Light-Up Frogs and Ducks Due to Choking Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Cost Plus World Market. The metal pin on the bottom of the soft plastic toys can come out.
CPSC, CFM Corporation Announce Recall of Legacy Propane Infrared Plaque Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), CFM Corporation, of Mississauga, Ontario, Canada is voluntarily recalling about 10,200 Legacy Propane Infrared Plaque Heaters. Carbon monoxide hazard. A non-specification gasket around the heating plaques could allow heater carbon monoxide emissions to leak into the area in which the heater is being used.
Dr. Martens Vegan Boots Recalled by Airwair Due to Chemical Exposure Hazard. Prolonged and direct contact with the boot tongue lining can expose the wearer to the chemical benzidine.
CPSC, Zeneca Pool Products Announce Recall of Oxidizer Increaser Tablets for Swimming Pools. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Zeneca Pool Products of Wilmington, Del., is voluntarily recalling about 17,000 boxes of BAQUA PLUSTM Oxidizer Increaser tablets. The tablets are used to help maintain the clarity of swimming pool water. The tablets could degrade and expand beyond their protective packaging at high temperatures. Contact with the chemicals in these tablets, sodium perborate and sodium bisulfate, can burn the eyes and irritate the skin, respiratory passages and mucous membrane.
CPSC, United Tradeline Announce Recall of Toy "Hot Pet Car". In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), United Tradeline Inc. of Arcadia, Calif., is recalling about 4,400 battery-operated toy cars. Small pieces could break off the cars, presenting a serious aspiration hazard to young children.
Angel Line Recalls to Repair Longwood Forest Drop-Side Cribs Due to Entrapment, Suffocation and Fall Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Angel Line, of Pennsville, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 3,400 Drop-Side Cribs. The crib's drop-side rail hardware can malfunction, detach or otherwise fail, causing part of the drop-side rail to detach from the crib. When the drop-side rail partially detaches, it creates a space between the drop side and the crib mattress. An infant or toddler's body can become entrapped in the space, which can lead to strangulation and/or suffocation. A child can also fall out of the crib. Drop-side incidents also can occur due to age-related wear and tear.
Evenflo Recalls Top-of-Stair Plus Wood Gates Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Evenflo Co. Inc. of Miamisburg, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 150,000 (in the United States) and 33,000 (in Canada) Evenflo Top-of-Stair Plus Wood Gates. The slats on the gate can break or detach, posing a fall hazard to children.
Recall Of Coffeemakers Announced. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today announced the recall of approximately 14,500 Nobility-brand 10-cup Automatic Coffeemakers, Model # 151, because they pose a potential fire hazard.
Children's Board Book Sets Recalled By Dalmatian Press Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dalmatian Press LLC, of Franklin, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 17,000 Little Builder Children's Board Book Sets with Toys. The cylinder on the toy concrete mixer and the tailgate on the toy dump truck can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, BRIO Corp. Announce Recall of Toy Trumpet. The BRIO Corp., of Germantown, Wis., is voluntarily recalling about 4,000 Ambi Bird Trumpet toys. The red and blue trumpets are about 5-inches long with a yellow bird attached to the top. A yellow knob on the side of the trumpet spins the bird. The words "Ambi Toys" are engraved on the side of the trumpet. Back to Basics Toys, a mail order catalog, sold the trumpets nationwide from September 2001 through November 2002 for about $13.
Teavana Recalls Glass Tea Tumblers Due To Laceration and Burn Hazards. Teavana has received about 300 reports of the glass tumblers breaking or shattering unexpectedly.
CPSC And Playskool Announce Recall Of 1-2-3 Swing. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Playskool, of Pawtucket, R.I., is voluntarily recalling 123,000 1-2-3 Swings. Although most consumers have not had a problem with the 1-2-3- Swing, 50 consumers have reported that children have fallen out of the swing, resulting in injuries ranging from bumps and bruises to a broken nose.
Trane Recalls Furnaces Due to Shock Hazard (Recall Alert). The ground wire in the furnace’s junction box can become loose. If an electrical component then fails and short circuits, the unit poses a shock hazard.
CPSC, ATICO International Recall Candle Holders. Candle Holders - ATICO International USA Inc., of Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., is recalling about 14,000 lighthouse-shaped candle holders. They are made of wood (painted white or natural) with a glass and metal top. They measure about 11 inches high and 5 inches wide. A tealight candle is placed in the top of the lighthouse and can be seen burning through the glass windows. There is no identifying information on the product. A sticker on the bottom of the candleholder reads, "Made in China." Rite Aid stores nationwide sold the candle holders from January through March 2000 for about $10.
Price/Costco Recalls Last Years's Reindeer Christmas Stocking. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), PriceCostco of Kirkland, Wash., is recalling about 17,000 reindeer Christmas stockings. During CPSC testing, a small gold colored bead on the reindeer's antlers pulled off, presenting a potential choking hazard to young children.
CPSC and In-Mar Trading Recall Christmas Lights. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), In-Mar Trading Inc. of Dorado, Puerto Rico is recalling over 140,000 Christmas light sets. The lights have no fuse protection and present a fire hazard due to inadequate wiring.
Schylling Associates Recalls Dizzy Ducks Music Box Due To Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Schylling Associates Inc., of Rowley, Mass., is voluntarily recalling about 1,300 Dizzy Ducks Music Boxes. Surface paints on the wooden base of the music box contain excessive levels of lead, which violates the federal lead paint standard.
Montgomery Ward Recalls 20,000 Toy Telephone Sets. Montgomery Ward is recalling approximately 20,000 toy telephone sets offered for sale through its mail-order catalog, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced.
Taco Bell Corp. Announces Voluntary Recall Of Promotional Items. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Taco Bell Corp. of Irvine, CA announced a voluntary recall of items recently distributed in two Kid's Meal promotions by Taco Bell restaurants throughout the United States.
Children's Hooded Jackets Sold Exclusively at Burlington Coat Factory Recalled by Franshaw Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Franshaw Inc., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 2,400 Children's Hooded Jackets. The jackets have drawstrings through the hood which can pose a strangulation hazard to young children. In February 1996 CPSC, issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled in the neck and waist drawstrings in upper garments, such as jackets or sweatshirts.
CPSC, Restoration Hardware Inc. Announce Recall of Stuffed Sock Monkeys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Restoration Hardware Inc., of Corte Madera, Calif., is recalling approximately 12,000 Sock Monkey stuffed animals. Sewing needles or pins have been found in the stuffing of these monkeys presenting a laceration hazard.
CPSC And IKEA Announce TV Cabinet Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IKEA, headquartered in Plymouth Meeting, Pa., is recalling about 1,700 BONDE TV Cabinets, model numbers 27371276, 17371205, and 57371208. The television shelf may collapse under the weight of a large 31-inch to 35-inch television. Consumers sitting immediately in front of the television could be seriously or fatally injured by a television falling from a collapsed shelf.
CPSC, Crosman Corporation Announce Recall of Air Rifles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Crosman Corporation, of East Bloomfield, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 1,500 spring-piston, break-action air rifles. The air rifles can discharge unexpectedly when the user closes the barrel, posing a serious risk of injury to consumers and bystanders.
Calphalon Recalls to Repair Contemporary Cutlery Knife Block Sets Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Calphalon Corporation, of Atlanta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 217,000 (in the United States) and 300 (in Canada) Calphalon Contemporary Cutlery Knife Sets. The tips of the 8- inch slicing knife and/or the 8-inch bread knife can protrude through the bottom slot row on the wooden block holder, posing a laceration hazard.
Intermatic Recalls In-Wall Timers Due to Shock Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Intermatic Inc., of Spring Grove, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 240,000 Intermatic Model ST01 and EI600 In-wall Electronic Timers. When consumers trying to replace the timer's battery place a metal object through the battery tray slot, the object can reach internal metal contacts, posing a shock hazard to consumers.
Weather Radios Recalled by Oregon Scientific Due to Failure to Receive National Weather Service Alerts. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Oregon Scientific Inc., of Tualatin, Ore., is voluntarily recalling about 66,000 Oregon Scientific Weather Radios. The radios could fail to receive National Weather Service alert signals in certain areas of the country. In the event of severe weather, this failure could put a consumer's life and property at risk.
Avon Recalls Nut Chopper Due to Risk of Injury. The tines of the grinding mechanism can break and these fragments can fall into the food being chopped.
CPSC, STK International Announce Recall of Clock Tambourine Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), STK International Inc. of Vernon, Calif., is recalling over 20,400 Clock Tambourine toys. Small pieces could break off the toys, presenting potential choking and aspiration hazards to young children.
Mirage Fashions Recalls Yoki Girls Faux Leather Jackets with Drawstrings Due to Strangulation Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Burlington Coat Factory. The girls' hooded jackets have drawstrings at the neck.
CPSC, Cordelia Lighting Announce Recall of Hampton Bay® Light Fixtures Sold at Expo Design Centers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cordelia Lighting, of Rancho Dominguez, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about 1,400 Hampton Bay halogen light fixtures. The decorative metal rings on the ends of the lamp fixtures can detach. Consumers could suffer minor burns if they touch the hot rings.
CPSC, Sun Rise Industrial Co., Ltd. and Raleigh America Inc. Announce Recall of Bicycles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sun Rise Bicycle Industrial Co. Ltd. of Taiwan and Raleigh America Inc., of Kent, Wash., are voluntarily recalling about 2,800 bicycles. The frames on these bicycles can break, which can cause riders to lose control and crash.
Goal Zero Recalls Solar Powered Charging Stations Due to Impact Hazard (Recall Alert). The weld connecting the top and bottom posts can fail and allow the top post to fall, posing an impact hazard to nearby consumers.
Musical Rocking Horse Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LTD Commodities, Inc., Bannockburn, IL has initiated a voluntary recall of approximately 4,000 "Musical Rocking Horse" toys, items "RHM-BLU" and "RHM-PNK", because of small parts that could pose a fatal choking hazard to young children. The eyes detached when the CPSC tested the rocking horses in accordance with regulations under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act.
CPSC & Montgomery Wards Recall Boys Jackets and Sweatshirts. Boys Jackets and Sweatshirts: Montgomery Ward, of Chicago, Ill., is recalling about 780 boys hooded jackets and sweatshirts sold under the brand name North West Blue. The jackets and sweatshirts being recalled have the following identification numbers printed on the care label: "RN90866" or "RN81862". The garments are made in Nepal or Pakistan from 100 percent cotton in sizes small through large. The sweatshirt is style RN 90866, which comes in navy or olive. This is a pullover style sweatshirt with a zipper front pouch pocket and elbow pads. The jacket is style RN 81862, which comes in khaki, navy, olive or natural with stripes on the chest and sleeves. This is a zip front jacket made from cotton canvas with a fleece hood. "North West Blue" is on a sewn-in label at the neck of both garment styles. Montgomery Ward stores nationwide sold the garments from August 1999 to October 1999 for about $20.
CPSC, Rubbermaid Recall Children's Whale, Dinosaur Hampers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rubbermaid Incorporated of Wooster, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling two similarly-constructed children's hampers, the Li'l Roughneck Humphrey the Dinosaur Hamper (item #2792) and the Li'l Roughneck Bubbles the Whale Hamper (item #2793).
Gemmy Industries Corp. Recalls Disney Plush Easter Baskets Sold at Wal-Mart Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gemmy Industries Corp., of Coppell, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 8,500 Disney Princesses Easter Baskets. Silver beads and ribbons attached to the basket can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, The Metal Ware Corp. Announce Recall of Deep Fryer Covers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Metal Ware Corp., of Two Rivers, Wis., is voluntarily recalling 47,000 deep fryers. The mesh filter in the cover of the deep fryer can allow moisture to build in the oil reservoir, causing the oil reservoir to boil over during or shortly after use. This poses a burn hazard to consumers.
Steam Cleaners Recalled by Thane International Due to Shock and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Thane International, Inc., of La Quinta, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 580,000 H2O Mop Steam Cleaners. The power cord can unexpectedly wear down and expose the wiring, posing a shock and burn hazard to consumers.
Matco Tools Wireless Chargers Recalled by Professional Tool Products Due to Burn Hazard. The wireless chargers can overheat, posing a burn hazard.
Maytag Recalls Refrigerators Due to Fire Hazard. 
Infant Death Prompts Recall of Ring Slings Made by Sprout Stuff Due to Suffocation Risk. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), in cooperation with Sprout Stuff, of Austin, Texas, is announcing the recall of about 40 Sprout Stuff infant ring slings. CPSC advises consumers to immediately stop using these slings due to a risk of suffocation to infants.
BRP Recalls All-Terrain Vehicles Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). The dynamic power steering shaft can break and result in a loss of steering control, posing a crash hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Shindaiwa Announce Recall Of Backpack Blowers And Chain Saws. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Shindaiwa Inc. of Tualatin, Ore., is announcing the recall of approximately 18,500 Shindaiwa model EB-45 backpack blowers, and 4,970 Shindaiwa model 300S chain saws. The tools' fuel tanks could leak, presenting a possible chemical burn or fire hazard. Shindaiwa is not aware of any injuries involving these products.
CPSC, Harbor Freight Tools Announce Recall of Heavy Duty Portable Industrial Cord Reel. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Harbor Freight Tools of Camarillo, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 9,390 Heavy Duty Portable Industrial Cord Reels. Electric shock or fire possible because the internal grounding conductor may not be properly secured to the receptacle.
International Vitamin Corp. Recalls Iron Products That Can Cause Serious Illness. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), International Vitamin Corp. (doing business as Synergy Plus), Union, NJ is voluntarily recalling its "SYNERGY PLUS (For Children Over 4 Years) CHEWABLES Vitabots Multiple Vitamins & Minerals with Digestive Enzymes and Oat Bran." This iron-containing vitamin and mineral supplement was not put in child-resistant packaging as required by the Poison Prevention Packaging Act. The lack of child-resistant packaging means that a child could easily access and accidentally swallow the iron tablets. Each bottle of the recalled product contains enough iron that, if consumed by a child at one time, it could cause serious illness requiring hospitalization.
IKEA Recalls Dining Tables Due to Laceration Hazard. The table’s glass extension leaf can detach and fall unexpectedly, posing a laceration hazard.
Janome America Inc. Recalls Elna Sewing Machines Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Janome America Inc. of Mahwah, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 600 sewing machines. The wires inside the sewing machine can short circuit, posing a risk of fire.
CPSC, Selle Royal/fi'zi:k Announce Recall of Bicycle Seats. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Selle Royal/fi'zi:k, of Pozzoleone, Italy is voluntarily recalling about 257 bicycle seats. The plastic scuff guard underneath the front of the seat, which secures the seat rails, may crack or break causing the rider to lose control and/or fall, resulting in a serious injury.
Air Conditioners Recalled. Carrier Corporation, Syracuse, N. Y., in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today reissued the announcement of its October 20, 1978 recall of two models of room air conditioners produced between 1962 and 1964.
Utility Knife Recalled by Dollar Tree Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dollar Tree Stores Inc., of Chesapeake, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 204,000 Tool Bench Utility Knives. The utility knife's blade can slide past the blade support during use, posing a laceration hazard to consumers.
Flushmate Expands Recall of Flushmate III Pressure-Assisted Flushing System Due to Impact and Laceration Hazards. The toilet systems can burst and shatter the toilet tank.
CPSC and Importers Announce Recall of Toys and Rattle. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), four toy importers are recalling over 133,000 toys and rattles. The toys and the rattle contain small components that can break off presenting a choking hazard to young children.
Deere & Company Recalls Lawn Tractors, Blade Could Operate While Mower Unattended. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Deere & Company of Moline, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 16,000 John Deere X300 Select Series Lawn Tractors. A problem in the manufacturing process could cause damage to the circuit in the interlock module. If the interlock module fails, the mower blades will be able to run with no operator on the tractor seat. Consumers could suffer injuries from contact with operating blades.
Suzuki Recalls KingQuad ATVs Due to Crash Hazard (Recall Alert). The ATV’s battery can fail and cause the engine to stop running while in use.
CPSC, Basic Comfort Inc. Announce Recall of Infant Seat Pads. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Basic Comfort Inc., of Denver, Colo., is voluntarily recalling about 16,000 infant seat pads. The seat pad has two shoulder straps that create a v-shaped opening around the head and neck, presenting a strangulation hazard to young children.
CPSC, The Sherwin-Williams Co. and Brockway Standard Inc. Announce Recall of Furniture Refinisher. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Sherwin-Williams Co., of Cleveland, Ohio and Brockway Standard Inc. of Atlanta, Ga., are voluntarily recalling about 3,000 cans of Formby's Conditioning Furniture Refinisher. The product and its vapors can seep or leak from the nozzle base at the top of the can, posing a risk of fire and chemical injuries.
Risk of Strangulation Prompts Recall to Repair of Roman Shades by Airtex Designs Group; Sold Exclusively by The Land of Nod. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Airtex Design Group Inc., of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 2,000 Roman Shades "Weren't Built in a Day". Strangulation can occur when a child places his/her neck between the exposed inner cord and the fabric on the backside of the blind or when a child pulls the cord out and wraps it around his/her neck.
Old Navy Recalls Stuffed Toys; Button Eyes Can Detach and Pose a Choking Hazard to Young Children. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, in cooperation with Old Navy LLC, of San Francisco, Calif., are voluntarily recalling about 35,500 (in the United States) and 5,400 (in Canada) Stuffed Animal and Creature Toys. The stuffed toys have two button eyes that could detach from the toy, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Indoor Lighting Fixtures Recalled by Lithonia Lighting Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lithonia Lighting, of Conyers, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 1,200 Indoor Lighting Fixtures. A thermal protector could be missing from the lighting fixtures, posing a risk of overheating and fire.
Kirkland Signature Sauté Pans with Glass Lids Sold at Costco Recalled by Meyer Marketing Due to Laceration Hazard. The six-quart aluminum pan's tempered glass lid can crack, break or shatter.
CPSC, Riteway Products Announce Recall of Bicycle Trailers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Riteway Products of Santa Ana, Calif., is recalling about 5,500 Cycle Design Tag-A-Long bicycle trailers to replace their U-Joints and accompanying hardware. The U-Joint can break causing the trailing rider to be separated from the towing bicycle, lose control, fall and be injured.
CPSC Announces Multiple Play Yard Recalls Due to Strangulation Hazard. Since 1983, CPSC has received eight reports of toddlers who strangled in their playpens when pacifier strings or clothing they were wearing caught on the playpens' protruding rivets.
Space Age Manufacturing Co. Recalls Dixie Delight Fireworks Device. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Space Age Manufacturing Co., South Pittsburgh, TN is voluntarily recalling approximately 4,200 "Dixie Delight" fireworks devices. The Dixie Delight model RP745 is a display rack fireworks device consisting of five 11-1/2 inch tall tubes mounted on a 7-1/2 inch square board. The device may tip over during operation and fire the charges horizontally, resulting in possible serious injury to persons nearby.
Viking Range Corporation Recalls Built-In Refrigerators Due to Injury Hazard; Doors Can Detach. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Viking Range Co., of Greenwood, Miss., is voluntarily recalling about 45,000 Viking Built-In Side-by-Side Refrigerator/Freezers and Refrigerators with Bottom Freezers. The refrigerator's doors can detach, posing an injury hazard to consumers.
C&T International/Sorelle Recalls Cribs Due to Strangulation and Suffocation Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, C&T International/Sorelle, of East Rutherford, New Jersey, is voluntarily recalling about 170,000 Drop-Side Cribs. The cribs' drop-side hardware can disengage from the tracks, causing the drop side to detach from the crib. When the drop-side partially detaches, it creates space between the drop side and the crib mattress. The bodies of infants and toddlers can become entrapped in the space, which can lead to strangulation and/or suffocation. Complete detachment of the drop sides can lead to falls from the crib. In addition, slats can detach from the sides of the cribs. Infants and toddlers can then become entrapped, strangle or fall out of the crib.
Target Recalls Baby Rattles and Ornaments for Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Target, of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 460,000 Plush Baby Rattles and Photo Frame Ornaments. Small parts on the plush rattles and frame ornaments can break or detach, posing a choking hazard to young children. Additionally, the rattles' plastic ring can break and expose sharp points.
Lumetique Recalls Botanika Candles Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Southern California Candle Co. Inc., of Los Angeles, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 DayNa Decker 16 ounce Botanika Candles. The glass can break during use, posing a fire hazard.
Pro Performance Recalls SKLZ Resistance Trainers Due to Risk of Severe Injury. A weld on a ring on the resistance trainer's belt can break during use and cause the resistance trainer's flexible cord to quickly and unexpectedly retract and hit an exercise partner who is holding the other end.
Nan Far Woodworking Recalls to Repair Drop-Side Cribs Due to Entrapment, Suffocation and Fall Hazards; Sold Exclusively at jcpenney. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Nan Far Woodworking Co. Ltd., of Taiwan, is voluntarily recalling about 16,700 Rockland Furniture drop-side cribs. The cribs' drop sides can malfunction, detach or otherwise fail, causing part of the drop side to fall out of position, creating a space into which an infant or toddler can roll and become wedged or entrapped, which can lead to strangulation or suffocation. A child can also fall out of the crib. Drop-side incidents can also occur due to incorrect assembly and with age-related wear and tear.
LF Products Recalls Barstools Due to Fall Hazard; New Instructions Provided; Sold Exclusively at Bed Bath & Beyond. Screws on the barstools can loosen, posing a fall hazard to the user.
CPSC and Sunbeam Products Inc. Announce Recall of Gas Grills With Side Burners. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sunbeam Products Inc., of Neosho Mo., is recalling for repair approximately 80,000 Grillmaster gas grills with side burners. The side burner's propane gas hose can twist up toward the aluminum casting of the grill, causing overheating and melting of the hose. Gas leakage or a fire could result from the hose damage.
CPSC, Murray Inc. Announce Recall of Lawn Mowers and Lawn Tractors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Murray, Inc., of Lawrenceburg, Tenn. is voluntarily recalling Murray lawn mowers, lawn tractors and garden tractors. Plastic components on these lawn mowers and lawn tractors can crack if they are struck by an object thrown from the blade. Objects can be ejected from the mower unexpectedly and could hit nearby consumers.
CPSC, Enesco Corp. Announce Recall of Pom-poms on Precious Moments® Tender Tails® Stuffed Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Enesco Corp., of Itasca, Ill., is recalling the pom- poms from about 472,000 Precious Moments Tender Tails stuffed toys. The pom-poms on these toys can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Kringles Toys and Gifts Recalls High Powered Magnets Due to Ingestion Hazard; Sold Exclusively on Amazon.com. If two or more magnets are swallowed they can link together inside a child's intestines.
Sweat Shirts Recalled By Huk-A-Poo. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Huk-A-Poo Sportswear, Inc. today announced a recall of some women's sweat shirts that may not have met federal flammability standards. The garments had been imported from a Hong Kong manufacturer.
CPSC, Suzuki Announce Recall of Four-Wheel Drive Eiger ATVs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Suzuki Motor Corporation of Brea, Calif.  is voluntarily recalling Eiger "QuadRunner" ATVs by Suzuki. Mislocated welds securing the upper front suspension arm mounting brackets to the frame. The mounting bracket could break off during riding, reducing rider control and resulting in loss of control of the ATV. Loss of control could result in a crash and severe personal injury or death.
Toddler Jeans Recalled by Gymboree. PRODUCT: Toddler Boys Denim Jeans - Gymboree Corp., of Burlingame, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 7,000 toddler boys 5-pocket denim jeans. These indigo-colored jeans were sold in children sizes small (2- 3), medium (3-4), large (4-5), XL (5-6) and XXL (6-7). A red and blue label on the jeans reads, "GYMSPORT," and "Made in Mexico." Gymboree stores nationwide sold these jeans from March 1999 through June 1999 for about $19.
CPSC, IKEA Announce Recall of Stuffed Teddy Bears. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IKEA, of Plymouth Meeting, Pa., is voluntarily recalling 57,000 stuffed teddy bears. The plastic beads inside of the bears could come out of the seams, posing an aspiration hazard to young children who could inhale the small beads.
CPSC, Etna Products Inc. Announce Recall of Wooden Toy Cars. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Etna Products Inc. of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 13,200 wooden toy cars. The glue holding the toy together deteriorates causing the hub caps, headlights, and blocks to separate. Young children could choke on the headlights and blocks or inhale the hub caps into their lungs, which could lead to death.
The Land of Nod Recalls Octopus Rattles Due to Choking Hazard. The fabric discs from the tentacles of the octopus rattle can detach.
Kohler Recalls Automatic Transfer Switches for Kohler Generators Due to Fire Hazard. The transfer switch can fail and overheat, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Sauder Woodworking Co. Announce Recall of TV/VCR Carts that Can Tip Over Easily, after Baby's Death. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Sauder Woodworking Co., of Archbold, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 592,000 TV/VCR carts. The carts can tip over and injure or kill children and adults when the cart and the television fall.
Spin Master Radio-Controlled Toy Airplanes Sold Exclusively at Toys R Us Recalled for Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Spin Master Toys, of Toronto, Canada, is voluntarily recalling about 7,500 Air Hogs RC Skywinder Radio-Controlled Airplanes. The rechargeable battery pack inside the toy airplane can overheat posing a burn hazard.
CPSC, Electrolux Home Products Announce Recall of Air Conditioning/Heating Units. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Electrolux Home Products Inc., of Cleveland, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 5,800 Room Air Conditioning and Heating Units. The heating coil in the units can be damaged during assembly, causing an electrical short and overheating, which poses a fire hazard to consumers.
Ski Boot Sole Pads with Steel Inserts and All-Terrain Ski Boots configured with them Recalled by Salomon USA Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Salomon USA of Ogden, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 175 pairs of ΓÇ£Quest Touring PadsΓÇ¥ about 83 pairs of ΓÇ£Quest Pro PebaxΓÇ¥ and ΓÇ£Quest ProΓÇ¥ ski boots. The toe portion of the boot pad may unexpectedly release from the touring-style ski binding on a ski, posing a fall or injury hazard to the user.
Academy Sports + Outdoors Recalls Girls BCG Hooded Windsuits Due to Strangulation Hazard. Hooded windsuits have drawstrings around the neck area. Children can become tangled in neck and waist drawstrings in upper outwear.
CPSC, Graco Children's Products Announce Recall of Bumble Bee Toys with Blue Antennae. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Graco Children's Products, Inc. of Exton, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 398,000 Bumble Bee Toys with blue antennae sold with certain Graco high chairs and Graco mobile entertainers, and also sold separately as an accessory and replacement part. The blue antennae on the Bumble Bee toy can break, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC and Whirlpool Announce Dishwasher Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Whirlpool Corporation of Benton Harbor, Mich. is announcing the voluntary recall of approximately 500,000 Whirlpool and Kenmore brand dishwashers. Wiring in the door latch may overheat and catch fire.
Hazardous Crib Decorations Recalled. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced that approximately 8,000 elastic crib decorations known as "Kickers" are being recalled voluntarily by their manufacturer. CPSC staff believes that the decorations may pose a strangulation hazard to infants.
CPSC, Rose Art Announce Recall of Children's Soap Making Kit. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rose Art Industries Inc., of Livingston, N.J., is voluntarily recalling about 124,400 Soap Making Kits. The soap may get too hot when heated in the microwave oven and leak from the plastic container posing a burn hazard to children.
Lip Gloss and Jewelry Sets Sold Exclusively at Wal-Mart Recalled by F.A.F. Inc. Due to Risk of Lead Exposure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), F.A.F. Inc., of Greenville, R.I., is voluntarily recalling about 30,000 ΓÇ£Faded GloryΓÇ¥ Lip Gloss, Locket, and Bracelet Sets. The lobster claw clasp on the bracelet contains high levels of lead, which is toxic if ingested and can cause adverse health effects.
CPSC, Dolgencorp Inc. Announce Recall of Toy Xylophones Sold at Dollar General Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dolgencorp Inc., of Goodlettsville, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 113,000 toy xylophones. The red mallet sold with the toy xylophone can get lodged in the throats of young children, posing a choking hazard.
CPSC, Swimways Corp. Announce Recall of Pool Dive Sticks. 
J. Crew Expands Recall of Baby Coveralls Due to Choking Hazard (Recall Alert). Snaps on the coveralls can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Bosch Thermotechnology Recalls Boilers Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Bosch Thermotechnology, of Londonderry, N.H., is voluntarily recalling about 90 Gas-Fired Wall-Hung Boilers. An electrical connector can overheat, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Girls' Ruffle Vests Recalled by The Children's Place Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, The Children's Place Services Company, LLC of Secaucus, N.J., is voluntarily recalling approximately 3,300 White Ruffle Outdoor Vests. Metal snaps can detach from garment causing a choking hazard.
FAF Inc. Recalls Children's Necklaces Sold Exclusively at Walmart Stores Due to High Levels of Cadmium. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), FAF Inc., of Greenville, R.I., is voluntarily recalling about 55,000 Children's Metal Necklaces. The recalled necklaces contain high levels of cadmium. Cadmium is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
CPSC Announces Recall Of Certain Stuffed Chicks And Ducklings. The U. S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and New Angles, Inc., Ventura, California, announce the recall of stuffed chicks and ducklings preserved with the poison, arsenic. 150 chicks and ducklings were distributed in floral arrangements to 58 floral shops nationwide during 1984. These arrangements are labeled with a sticker that warns customers of the presence of arsenic. All 58 floral shops are being advised by New Angles, Inc., to stop selling arrangements containing arsenic preserved birds.
Mattress Cloud Recalls Mattresses Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The mattresses, which were sold in N.J, N.Y. and Pa., pose a fire hazard to consumers.
Christmas Tree Shops Recall Animated Safari and Aquarium Lamps Due to Fire and Shock Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Nantucket Distributing Co. Inc., of Middleboro, Mass., is voluntarily recalling about 35,000 animated Safari and Aquarium lamps. Defective wiring in the lamps can cause an electrical short, posing fire and shock hazards to consumers.
CPSC, Childcraft Education Corp. Announce Recall of Changing Table with Steps. Childcraft Education Corp. of Lancaster, Pa., is voluntarily recalling about 700 wooden changing tables with steps. The overall size of the wooden changing table is 42 inches long by 26 3/4 inches wide by 36 inches high. The front of the unit has three doors, behind a door are toddler steps that slide out and in when not in use, while the other doors house a storage area with two sliding drawers. The top changing table has a quilted vinyl pad, built-in safety straps, and a wall shelf unit. The recalled changing tables with steps were manufactured prior to December 1, 2000. Childcraft Education Corp. sold the recalled changing tables with steps to daycare centers and pre-schools from January 1998 to May 2001 for about $700.
"Squeeze Me Bear" Toy Animals Recalled To Eliminate Safety Hazards. A children's stuffed animal sold nationwide as the "Squeeze Me Bear" is being recalled by the importer in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission because the toy may present safety hazards which could injure young children.
BMC Recalls Three Models of Bicycles Due to Fall Hazard;  Bicycle Forks Can Break. The bicycle forks on BMC Alpenchallenge, Masschallenge and Urbanchallenge bikes can crack or break above the brake mount.
Faulty Instructions Prompt Recall of Electrical Wiring How-to-Books by The Taunton Press; Shock Hazard to Consumers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Taunton Press, of Newtown, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 64,000 Wiring a House, 3rd Edition and Wiring Complete, Expert Advice from Start to Finish Instructional Books. The books contain several errors in the technical diagrams that could lead consumers to incorrectly install or repair electrical wiring, posing an electrical shock hazard to consumers.
Polaris Recalls Ranger Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. Polaris Recalls Ranger Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles Due to Fire and Burn Hazards
CPSC, IKEA Home Furnishings Announce Recall of Fargglad Multi-Color Children's Chair. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), IKEA Home Furnishings of Plymouth Meeting, Penn. is voluntarily recalling 7,279 Fargglad multi-color children's chairs. There is a choking hazard from red plastic feet that can detach from chair legs.
Kmart Recalling Plastic Resin Patio Chairs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kmart Corporation, Troy MI, is voluntarily recalling white, plastic resin patio chairs that have the potential to collapse. Kmart reported the problem to CPSC after receiving complaints from consumers.
Bobcat Company Recalls Utility Vehicles Due To Burn and Fire Hazards (Recall Alert). The utility vehicle’s exhaust header pipe can crack, posing burn and fire hazards.
Lighthouse Recalls Ceramic Mugs Due to Burn Hazard. Hot liquids can seep through hairline cracks, posing a burn hazard.
Swing Sets Recalled by Adventure Playsets due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Adventure Playsets, of Pittsburg, KS, is voluntarily recalling approximately 240,000 Adventure Playsets Wooden Swing Sets (a number of these products were recalled in November 2009 for a similar hazard, which listed 275,000 playsets in the U.S. and 6,800 in Canada). The wood in the posts of the fort sections on the swing sets can weaken due to rotting, posing a fall hazard.
Kids II Recalls Baby Einstein Activity Jumpers Due to Impact Hazard; Sun Toy Can Snap Backward. Kids II has received 100 reports of incidents and 60 reports of injuries related to the "sun" toy on stationary activity center for babies.
Sherwin-Williams Recalls Purdy Scrapers Due to Laceration Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Sherwin-Williams Co., of Cleveland, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 76,000 Purdy 2 ┬╜ΓÇ¥ 4-Edge Scrapers. The recalled scraper's body can break away from the handle when struck against a hard object. This poses a laceration hazard to users.
Straps On Teddy Bear Swings May Break; Newco Recalls Swings To Prevent Falls. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Newco, Inc. of Janesville, WI is recalling its "Swing-N-Slide" molded plastic Teddy Bear Swing.   The plastic swing seat is shaped like a brown teddy bear
CPSC, Accoutrements Announce Squeak Toy Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Accoutrements of Seattle, Washington, is voluntarily recalling 120,960 Squeak Pickle toys and 25,056 Squeak Kangaroo and baby kangaroo toys. During normal use, the squeaker device can separate from the toys, posing a choking hazard for young children.
Urgent Warning To Discard U.S. Mom's "Baby's Cloud" Infant Bean Bag Cushion Because Of Suffocation Risk. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission staff is urging consumers to destroy immediately any "Baby's Cloud" infant cushions in their possession because of a suffocation risk. The Baby's Cloud infant cushion was manufactured by U.S. Mom's, Las Vegas, NV. The Commission has received 19 reports that an infant was found dead lying face-down on an infant bean bag cushion. None of the reported deaths involves a U.S. Mom's product.
The Little Tikes Co. Recalls Animal-Shaped Flashlights Containing Lead Paint Sold at Target. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Little Tikes Co., of Hudson, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 20,800 Glowin' Dino and Glowin' Doggy Animal Flashlights. The light green paint on the dinosaur-shaped flashlight and the brown paint on the dog-shaped flashlight could contain excess levels of lead. Lead is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
Hunter Fan Recalls Humidifiers for Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hunter Fan Co., of Memphis, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling about 84,000 Warm Mist Carefree Humidifier. Water used in the humidifier can leak into the unit's electrical compartment, posing a fire hazard.
KTM North America Recalls Competition Off-Road Motorcycles Due to Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). Under extreme riding conditions, fuel can escape from the tank breather assembly. This poses a risk of fire and injury to the rider.
phil&teds Recalls Infant Car Seat Adaptors for Strollers Due to Fall Hazard. The adaptors connecting the car seat to the stroller can crack and break and the infant can fall.
Liquidation Outlet, Inc. Recalls Action Figure Toys Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard; Sold Exclusively at Dollar Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Liquidation Outlet, Inc., of Lakewood, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 8,400 Force Soldier, Pirate Expeditions with Parrot, and Pirate Expeditions with Treasure playsets. The action figure toys have surface paints which contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
CPSC, Thomson Announce Recall of Home Entertainment Amplifiers. Thomson Inc., of Indianapolis, Ind., is voluntarily recalling about 50,000 home entertainment amplifiers. The amplifier can overheat due to a lack of ventilation, which can cause melting of the plastic front cover and pose a shock hazard to consumers.
CPSC Wants "Monster" Ride Inspected For Defects. After a preliminary investigation of an amusement park accident that killed one person and injured at least six others at the Broward County, Florida Fair in November 1988, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) has asked owners and operators of all "Monster" amusement rides nationwide to undertake immediate metallurgical inspections of the ride to protect the public.
Coleman Recalls Inflatable Rubber River Tubes Due to Skin Irritation Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Walmart. Contact with Sevylor one-person River Racer tubes can cause skin irritation.
Rugs Sold Exclusively at JC Penney Recalled by JLA Home Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), JLA Home, of Plano, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 2,900 Zebra Rugs. The rugs do not meet the federal flammability standard for small rugs and do not have the required flammability warning label.
Design Solutions International with Home Depot Recalls Light Fixtures Due to Laceration and Burn Hazards. The light shades can detach and fall, posing laceration and burn hazards.
Bicycle Recall Announced. Huffy Corp., Dayton, Ohio, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), today warned consumers that about 54,000 bicycles manufactured by Huffy may contain pedal cranks that could break without warning. Sudden breakage of the crank will cause one pedal to fall off and may result in the rider falling or otherwise losing control of the bicycle. CPSC believes that serious injury could happen if this occurs.
CPSC, Hanna's Candle Co. Announce Recall of Millennium Candles Sold at SAMS CLUB Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hanna's Candle Co., of Fayetteville, Ark., is voluntarily recalling more than 3,000 Millennium candles sold to SAMS CLUB. The candle holder can crack when the burning wick touches the side of the glass, causing lacerations.
Franklin Sports Industries, Inc. Recalls All Of Its Lawn Darts. Franklin Sports Industries, Inc. of Stoughton, Massachusetts, is the first company to voluntarily recall its yard dart sets because the blunt metal tips may pose a risk of injury, especially to children.
Homelite Recalls Electric Blower Vacuums Due to Laceration Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Home Depot. Objects that are drawn into the unit during vacuum mode can break through the plastic housing, posing a laceration hazard.
CPSC, American Water Heater Group Announce Free Home Repair of LP Polaris Comfort Systems. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Mor-Flo Industries Inc., doing business as the American Water Heater Group of Johnson City, Tenn., is announcing a voluntary recall program to repair approximately 6,500 LP Polaris Comfort Systems combination water heaters and home heating systems. Under certain circumstances, fuel gas may ignite explosively, causing property damage or injury.
Replacement Program Announced For Roadmaster Corporation 12" Sidewalk Bicycles W/Plastic Wheels. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission, the Roadmaster Corporation of Olney, Illinois today announces a voluntary replacement program involving several thousand plastic "mag" wheels on boys and girls models 9693-KM & 7973-KM 12" sidewalk bicycles. The hazard involves a wheel breakage problem which may occur when the tire is inflated significantly beyond the recommended inflation pressure.
Target Recalls Circo Girls Fleece Pajamas Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The blanket sleepers fail to meet the federal flammability standard for children's sleepwear. This is a burn hazard to kids.
CPSC, Giftco Announce Recall of Fork in Winnie the Pooh Baby Plate Set. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Giftco, Inc. of Vernon Hills, IL, is recalling 26,157 Winnie the Pooh Plate Sets with plastic forks and spoons. The plastic fork prongs in the plate set can break posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, Family Dollar Services Inc. Announce Recall of Extension Cords. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Family Dollar Services, Inc., of Charlotte, N.C. is voluntarily recalling 60,000 Durex Procraft Outdoor Extension Cords. Use of these extension cords could result in an electric shock or electrocution to consumers.
CPSC, T.S. Toys Announce Recall of Activity Block Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), T.S. Toys of Hong Kong is recalling about 4,000 Activity Block Sets. Rods on one of the blocks could break, releasing small hollow cylinders. Young children could choke on these cylinders.
CPSC, Walt Disney Parks and Resorts Announce Recall of Woody Dolls. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Walt Disney Parks and Resorts is voluntarily recalling about 40,000 Woody dolls sold at the WALT DISNEY WORLD« Resort in Lake Buena Vista, Florida, DISNEY'S VERO BEACH Resort, Magic of Disney and Flight Fantastic shops located at the Orlando International Airport and Disney's Worldport shop located at Pointe Orlando. The Woody doll's clothing has buttons that can detach, posing a choking hazard for young children.
Polaris Industries LP Modification Program On 1990-1992 Models Of Snowmobiles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Polaris Industries LP, Minneapolis, MN, is voluntarily notifying owners of its 1990 - 1992 model snowmobiles of reported problems with operation of the parking brake. The snowmobile's parking brake, if left engaged during use, may cause overheating and possible fire. These snowmobiles can present a serious risk of injury to the rider due to fire, as well as major property damage to the machine.
Injuries Continue With Some Hedstrom Backyard Gym Sets. If you own certain Hedstrom and Sears brand gym sets with "glide rides," and they haven't been retrofitted with glide guards to prevent potential finger amputations and lacerations, the Hedstrom Corporation of Bedford, Pennsylvania wants to hear from you. Hedstrom is renewing its campaign to provide free glide guards to owners of sets sold from 1982 to July 1, 1988, because of low consumer response to its original offer and because 19 additional injuries have been reported.
Gleason Recalls Hand Trucks Due to Laceration and Injury Hazards. The wheel’s plastic rims can break when overinflated, posing a laceration or injury hazard.
Fisher-Price Splash & Stack Bluebird Toy Part Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Fisher-Price, a Division of the Quaker Oats Company, East Aurora, New York, today announced a voluntary recall and replacement of the Fisher-Price brand "Splash & Stack Bluebird" toy, Model #167 due to a potential suffocation hazard. associated with the cup-shape head of the toy. The Company will replace the head portion of the toy.
Macy's Recalls Martha Stewart Collection Enamel Cast Iron Casseroles Due to Laceration and Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Macy's Merchandising Group, New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 960,000 Martha Stewart Collection™ enamel cast iron casseroles. The enamel coating on the cast iron casseroles can crack or break during use. This can cause the enamel to crack and fly off as a projectile, posing a risk of laceration or burn hazard to the user or bystanders.
CPSC, Sandberg Manufacturer Co. Announce Recall of Children's Dressers. 
Cork Block Stacking Toys Recalled by A Harvest Company Due to Choking Hazard; Sold Exclusively at StorkStack.com. Small pieces of cork can break off the stackable blocks.
Faulty Installation Instructions Prompt RadioShack Corp. Recall of Electrical Switches; Shock Hazard to Consumers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), RadioShack Corp., of Fort Worth, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 18,000 Illuminated Round Rocker Switches. The wiring diagram on the switch's package is incorrect. The Neutral and Line notation is reversed, posing a shock hazard to consumers.
Climate Control Footrests Recalled by Fellowes Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Fellowes, Inc., of Itasca, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 Fellowes Climate Control Footrests. The footrest's fan can become blocked and overheat when used in the upright position, posing a fire hazard.
Basic Editions Girls' Clothing Sets Recalled by Kmart; Drawstrings at Waist Pose Entrapment Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Millennium Apparel Group, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 4,700 Basic Editions-brand Girls' Clothing Sets. The recalled shirts have drawstrings at the waist. Children can get entangled or caught in a vehicle door and can be dragged, posing a serious risk of injury or death. In February 1996, CPSC issued guidelines to help prevent children from strangling or getting entangled on the neck and waist by drawstrings in upper garments.
Children's Hooded Jackets and Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled By VOS Sports Due To Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, VOS Sports Inc., City of Industry, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 11,700 Hooded jackets and sweatshirts. The children's hooded sweatshirts have a drawstring through the hood and/or waist that can pose a strangulation or entrapment hazard to children.
Recall Of Electric Worm Probe Announced. Terrann Industries, Inc., producers of the "Baitcatcher," an electric worm probe, today announced in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission that the company has suspended sale and is conducting a total recall of approximately 6,000 "Baitcatchers" sold since the commencement of marketing in 1975. The probe consists of a partially insulated metal rod and an on-off switch, attached to which is a plug and a cord. The worm probe uses electric current to bring worms to the surface. The recall is the result of an agreement between Terrann and the Consumer Product Safety Commission which states that the product may present a substantial risk of electric shock to users. Owners should discontinue use of the probe and promptly return it to the place of purchase or to Terrann Industries, Inc., 17204 McFadden, Tustin, California 92680.
Speed Buckle Harnesses Used During Mountain and Rock Climbing Recalled for Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Black Diamond Equipment Ltd., of Salt Lake City, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 18,000 Speed Buckle Harnesses. The harness could be threaded incorrectly. If threaded incorrectly, the webbing will easily slip when loaded. Incorrectly threaded buckles can loosen, which could cause climbers to slip out of the harness and fall.
Summit Recalls Climbing Treestands Due to Fall Hazard. A weld in the treestand’s frame can break during use, posing a fall hazard.
Dunkin’ Donuts Recalls Glass Tumblers Due to Laceration and Burn Hazards. The glass tumblers can crack or break, posing laceration and burn hazards.
Reynolds Recalls Bicycle Forks Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), MacLean Quality Composites, d.b.a. Reynolds, of West Jordan, Utah, is voluntarily recalling about 330 Reynolds UL Bicycle Forks. The fork tips could separate from the fork legs, causing the wheel to come loose from the fork while riding. This could pose a serious fall hazard to riders.
Traeger Grills Recalls Wood Pellet Grills Due to Fire Hazard. Grease can leak from the drip tray, posing a fire hazard.
Black & Decker Recalls Trimmers/Edgers Due to Laceration Hazard from Projectiles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Black & Decker (U.S.) Inc., of Towson, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 202,000 Black & Decker GH1000 Grasshog XP String Trimmer/Edgers. The trimmer/edger's spool, spool cap and pieces of trimmer string can come loose during use and become airborne projectiles, posing a laceration hazard to the user as well as bystanders. The trimmer/edgers can also overheat posing a burn hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Cosco Announce Recall for In-Home Repair of VoyagerTM Car Seat/Strollers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cosco Inc. of Columbus, Ind., is recalling about 6,000 Voyager TM Car Seat/Strollers for in-home repair. The Voyager TM Car Seat/Stroller is a combination product with an infant car seat that snaps into a frame for use as a stroller. When used as the stroller, the car seat could become dislodged and fall to the ground. Infants could be injured from the fall.
Stainless Steel Cookware Recalled by Cost Plus World Market Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Cost Plus Inc., of Oakland, CA, is voluntarily recalling about 300 sets of Stainless Steel Cookware. The handles on the cookware can break, posing a burn hazard to consumers.
American Boy and Girl Recalls Infant Sandals Due to Choking Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Meijer Stores. The top strap on "Falls Creek Baby"-style sandals can be pulled loose from the shoe.
Energy-Saving Devices Recalled. Intermatic, Inc., a manufacturer and supplier of electrical products in Spring Grove, Illinois, is voluntarily recalling the heating units from approximately 53,000 automatic temperature setback controls, the Consumer Product Safety Commission today announced.
John Deere Gas Barbecue Grills Recalled Due to Fire, Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Onward Manufacturing, of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, Mi-T-M Corporation, of Peosta, Iowa, and Deere & Company, of Moline, Ill. are voluntarily recalling about 3,100 John Deere Gas Barbecue Grills. Operating the grill in windy conditions can blow the flame under the control panel, causing the grill to overheat or cause flashbacks. Flames could damage the hose that supplies gas to the burner, causing an uncontrolled flame. Also, the grill's control knobs could overheat, resulting in burns to hands.
Lenmar Enterprises Recalls Rechargeable Batteries Sold for Cordless Phones Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Lenmar Enterprises, of Camarillo, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1,400 Rechargeable Batteries for Cordless Phones. The rechargeable batteries can overheat, posing a fire and burn hazard to consumers.
Waupaca Elevator Recalls to Inspect Elevators Due to Injury Hazard. The elevator cab can fall unexpectedly to the bottom of the elevator shaft and abruptly stop, posing an injury hazard to consumers in the elevator cab.
Children's Hooded Sweatshirts with Drawstrings Recalled by Sunsations Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Sunsations Inc., of Virginia Beach, Va., is voluntarily recalling about 3,600 children's hooded sweatshirts with drawstrings. The hooded sweatshirts have drawstrings through the hood which can pose a strangulation or entrapment hazard to children.
CPSC Warns Of Safety Risk With Yazoo Brand Walk Behind Lawn Mowers. Yazoo Manufacturing Company, Jackson, MS, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), is issuing a warning to consumers concerning its commercial "high wheel" gasoline powered walk-behind lawn mowers in advance of a retrofit program under development. These lawn mowers are not equipped with a blade control device that stops the blade within three seconds after release of the controls as required for consumer mowers by the CPSC Safety Standard for Walk-Behind Lawn Mowers. As a result, consumers may be injured from contact with the rotating mower blade.
CPSC, Dana Innovations Announce Recall of Amplified Volume Controls. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Dana Innovations, of San Clemente, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about 650 in-wall amplified volume control keypads. The amplifier in the keypad can overheat, posing a burn or fire hazard.
J.C. Penney Recalls Deluxe Art Sets Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), J.C. Penney, of Plano, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 19,000 Deluxe Wood Art Sets. Surface paint on the outside of the wooden box contains excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
BioSensory Recalls Dragonfly II Mosquito Trap and NightWatch Bedbug Monitor Products Due to Laceration or Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BioSensory, Inc., of Putnam, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 70 Dragonfly II Mosquito Traps and 1500 NightWatch Bed Bug Monitors. Carbon dioxide (CO2) pressure sensors inside these products can crack and leak or burst causing the release of CO2. This could cause cracks with sharp edges that could cut a consumer's hand, or direct CO2 discharge could cause a frostbite-like burn to a consumer's hand.
Rhino Toys Inc. Recalls Bead Toy Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Rhino Toys Inc., of Santa Cruz, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 5,500 Beado handheld bead play toys. The toys' plastic wires can detach from the hubs due to insufficient adhesive, allowing the beads to slide off. The loose beads pose a choking hazard to young children.
Commercial Frozen Food Merchandisers Recalled by Tyler Refrigeration Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Tyler Refrigeration, of Niles, Mich., is voluntarily recalling about 1,900 Commercial Frozen Food Merchandisers. Incomplete/incorrect light bulb installation can result in electrical arcing in the fixture, which can pose a fire hazard to consumers.
WARNING: Generation 2 Worldwide "SafetyCraft" Brand Drop-Side Cribs Pose Risks of Strangulation, Suffocation Hardware Linked to Deaths and Injuries. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is warning consumers that "SafetyCraft" brand full-size and portable drop-side cribs manufactured or distributed by Generation 2 Worldwide of Dothan, Alabama, contain drop-side hardware that appears to be identical to Generation 2 Worldwide ChildESIGNS brand drop-side cribs recalled in February 2010. This hardware found on SafetyCraft drop-side cribs can fail and place infants and toddlers at risk of strangulation and suffocation. CPSC staff urges parents and caregivers to stop using these cribs immediately and find an alternative, safe sleeping environment for their baby. Do not attempt to fix these cribs.
Electrical Wire Recalled by Cerro Wire due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Cerro Wire Inc., of Crothersville, Ind., is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 rolls of THHN Electrical Wire. While the actual electrical wire has "14 gauge" printed on it, the packaging incorrectly labels the electrical wire as 12 gauge. If used as a 12 gauge wire, it can overload, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Saris Cycling Group Recalls Stationary Bicycle Trainers Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Saris Cycling Group, of Madison, Wis., is voluntarily recalling 2,000 Stationary Bicycle Trainers. A handle pin on the bicycle trainer can loosen during use, causing the machine to become disengaged, and pose a fall hazard to consumers.
CPSC & Tech Mart Recall Christmas Lights. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) announced today the voluntary recall of Christmas lights imported by Tech Mart Inc. of Houston, Texas. The lights, which may present a fire hazard, were distributed between October 24, 1994, through November 14, 1994, in wholesale and retail stores in Illinois, Georgia, Minnesota, Tennessee, Texas, and Maryland.
Bicycle Pedals Recalled by Time Sport International Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), TIME SPORT INTERNATIONAL/ATAC 2001 Inc., of Montecito, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 18,000 Time RXS Titan Carbon, RXS Carbon, RXS and RXE Bicycle Pedals. The pedal's bearing cap can fail causing the pedal to come off the bicycle. This poses a fall hazard for riders.
Metal Charms Recalled for Lead Poisoning Hazard to Children. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Provo Craft & Novelty Inc., of Spanish Fork, Utah is recalling about 29,000 Art Accentz™ Changlz™ Metal Charms. The recalled charms contain high levels of lead, posing a serious risk of lead poisoning and adverse health effects to young children.
Children's Hooded Jackets with Drawstrings Recalled by 5 Star Apparel Due to Strangulation Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, 5 Star Apparel LLC, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 11,500 Mecca Children's Hooded Jackets with Drawstrings. The jackets have drawstrings through the hood which can pose a strangulation hazard to young children.
TAC LLC Recalls "Erie Boiler Boss" Boiler Controls for Scald Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), TAC LLC, of Loves Park, Ill. (formerly Invensys Building Systems), is voluntarily recalling about 850 ΓÇ£Erie Boiler BossΓÇ¥ Operating and Reset Controls. These boiler controls can fail, causing water temperature to rise to the high temperature limit. Should the high temperature thermostat or external safety limit devices also fail, consumers could suffer scalds from unexpectedly hot water during use or system piping damage can result.
Repair Of Defective Baby Strollers Announced. Gerico Inc., Boulder, Colorado, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) today announced a voluntary repair program affecting 40,000 potentially defective portable baby strollers.
Wood Castle Furniture Recalls Bunk Beds Due to Entrapment Hazard. The space between the guardrails on the bunk bed can be too wide and fail to meet safety standards
Halloween Products Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Wisconsin Pharmacal Company, Inc. of Jackson, WI is voluntarily recalling its model numbers 934 and 935 "Sundown Brand Pumpkin Scented Lamps" and model number 940 "Jack-O-Lantern Votive Light." The Halloween items are not equipped with child-resistant closures and the required warning labels are inconspicuous or absent. These products are all fuel burning lamps, intended for use as stand alone decorative lamps or as lamps to be placed inside carved pumpkins, contain liquid combustible petroleum distillates which can cause serious illness or death if ingested by a child.
CPSC, Country Home Products, Inc. Announce Recall to Repair Cordless Electric Lawnmowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Country Home Products, Inc., of Vergennes, Vt. is voluntarily recalling 25,000 2004 model Neuton cordless electric Lawnmowers. These lawnmowers contain an electronic switch in their handlebar. In certain instances this switch is not aligned properly, in which case the mower does not comply with the mandatory federal safety standard for lawnmowers under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act. The safety standards require that lawn mowers contain a blade control system that includes a handlebar that is designed to cause the motor to stop in the event that the operator ceases to maintain a grip on the handlebar. In units containing the defective switch, when the handlebar is released, the motor continues to run which causes the blade to continue to spin. When this occurs, the potential for personal injury or property damage exists.
Kids II Inc. Recalls Crib Toys Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kids II Inc., of Alpharetta, Ga., is voluntarily recalling about 15,000 Baby Einstein Baby Neptune Soothing Seascape Crib Toys. The anchors that hold the straps to the back of the turtle can detach, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Fireworks Over America Recalls Fireworks Due to Burn, Fire, Impact Hazards. The lit firework can tip over and fire shells at bystanders, posing burn, fire and impact hazards to consumers.
Resistance Stretch Tubing Recalled by EB Brands Due to Injury Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, EB Brands, of Yonkers, New York, is voluntarily recalling about 29,700 resistance stretch tubing units. The handle on the tubing, also called bands, can break or detach while in use, causing the tubing or handle to strike the user and posing an injury hazard.
CPSC, Pfaltzgraff Issue Safety Alert Concerning Pizza Stones. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Pfaltzgraff Co. of York, Pa., is warning consumers about a potential fire hazard with about 123,500 Pfaltzgraff pizza stones and deep dish pizza stones. If consumers use oil on the stones and clean them using a 550 degrees Fahrenheit oven or using the oven's self-cleaning cycle, as currently recommended in the instruction booklets accompanying the stones, the stones can catch on fire.
CPSC And Consumer Products Industries, Inc., Announce A Recall Of Decorative Night Lights. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Consumer Products Industries, Inc., today announced the recall of potentially hazardous decorative night lights.
Curious George Plush Dolls Recalled By Marvel Toys Due to Risk of Lead Exposure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Marvel Toys, of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 175,000 Curious George Plush Dolls. Surface paint on the toy's plastic face and construction hat contain excessive levels of lead, which violates the federal lead paint standard.
CPSC, Power Cord & Cable Corp. Announce Recall of Outlet Converters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Power Cord & Cable Corp. of College Point, N.Y., is recalling about 850 outlet converters, which convert a single electrical outlet into three outlets. Plugs using these outlet converters can come partially out of the receptacles, presenting shock and electrocution hazards. In addition, even if the plugs look like they are securely plugged in, there could be a poor electrical connection, presenting a fire hazard.
CPSC, Excel Industries Inc. Announce Recall of Riding Lawn Mowers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Excel Industries Inc., of Hesston, Kan., is voluntarily recalling about 1,500 Hustler "FasTrak" riding lawn mowers. Excessive heat, vibrations and wear causes the fuel line to droop over time and rub against the transmission fan, causing the fuel line to be cut. This poses a fire hazard and a risk of burn injuries to consumers.
Bonne Bell Recalls Children's Cosmetics Accessory Bags Due to Risk of Lead Exposure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Bonne Bell Co., of Lakewood, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 945,000 Bonne Bell Children's Cosmetics Accessory Bags. The metal clasps on the handle of the accessory bags contain excessive levels of lead, which is toxic if ingested and can cause adverse health effects.
CPSC, Learning Curve Int'l Inc. Announce Recall of Lamaze Activity Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Racing Champions Ertl/Learning Curve Int'l., Inc. (RCE/LCI), of Chicago, IL is voluntarily recalling approximately 3,800 children's activity toys. There are two types of activity toys involved in this recall. One toy is a flower shaped toy intended to attach to a stroller, with a green painted metal wire on which plastic beads slide along. The item is the Lamaze Flower Stroller Wrap (SKU #97222). The other toy is a floor-based toy with a foam stuffed base, a blue painted metal wire on which plastic beads and stuffed animal heads slide along. This item is the Lamaze Soft Bead Buddies (SKU #97325). Each item has a sewn-in label with the Lamaze logo on the front. These toys were sold in March 2003 through specialty and toy stores nationwide for around $19.99.
K Mart Recalling Scissors Desk Set. K-Mart Corporation of Troy, Michigan, is voluntarily recalling some 48,000 scissors desk sets because a razor blade cutting knife in the set may pose a serious laceration hazard to young children.
RadioShack Recalls Knight Hawk Toy Helicopters Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), RadioShack Corp., of Fort Worth, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 Danbar Knight Hawk Toy Helicopters. The battery housing under the helicopter canopy can overheat while charging, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Toymax Inc. Announce Recall to Replace Skeet Shoot Game Cartridges. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Toymax Inc., of Plainview, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling approximately 435,000 Arcadia Electronic Skeet Shoot games to replace the game cartridges. The skeet shoot games' cartridges can be defective, and can cause the projector to overheat, melt and smoke, presenting a risk of burns to consumers.
"Alexander Designs" Brand Drop-Side Cribs Sold Exclusively at JCPenney Recalled for Repair Due to Entrapment, Suffocation and Fall Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Jardine Enterprises Ltd., of Taipei, Taiwan, is voluntarily recalling about 11,400 Alexander Designs Ltd. brand drop-side cribs. The drop-side rail hardware on the cribs can break or fail, allowing the drop side to detach from the crib. When the drop side detaches, a hazardous gap is created between the drop-side rail and the crib mattress in which infants and toddlers can become wedged or entrapped, posing risks of suffocation and strangulation. In addition, children can fall out of the crib when the drop-side rail falls unexpectedly or detaches from the crib. Drop-side rail failures also can occur due to incorrect assembly or with age-related wear and tear.
Slingshots Recalled by Daisy Manufacturing Due to Risk of Serious Eye Injury. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Daisy Manufacturing Co., of Rogers, Ark., is voluntarily recalling about 104,500 units of "The Natural" Slingshot. If the slingshot band slips out of its frame during use, the ball at the end of the tubing can strike the user, resulting in serious facial injuries.
Pier 1 Imports Recalls Bistro Chairs Due to Fall Hazard. The bolts and/or nuts connecting the chair legs to the chair base can loosen and make the chair unstable, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
Treestands Recalled by Gander Mountain Company Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gander Mountain Company, of St. Paul, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 13,000 Hang-On Fixed Position Treestands. The clasp may open unexpectedly if the strap is fastened incorrectly, causing the treestand and user to fall to the ground.
Knape & Vogt Recalls Office Workstations Due to Injury Hazard. The workstation can malfunction, causing the gas cylinders to separate and forcefully discharge, posing an injury hazard.
Tyco Fire & Security Announces Recall to Upgrade Software of Fire Detection Systems. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Tyco Fire & Security, of Boca Raton, Fla. is voluntarily recalling about 21,000 Fire Detection Systems. Sensors in these fire detection systems could experience reduced sensitivity to smoke in conditions of high humidity and high temperature. If this occurs, these sensors could delay detecting the presence of smoke in the event of a fire.
Green Toys Recalls Mini Vehicles Due To Choking Hazard. The toy car's wheels and hubcaps can loosen and detach. This poses a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, STK International Announce Recall of Baby Rattles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), STK International Inc., of Vernon, Calif., is recalling about 15,800 baby rattles. The handles of these rattles could present a serious choking hazard to infants and young children. Because of the rattle handles' shape, they could block a child's airway if inserted in the throat.
CPSC, KFC Corporation Announce Recall of Toy Included With KFC Kids Meals. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), KFC Corporation, of Louisville, Ky., is voluntarily recalling about 425,000 Tangled Treeples toys included with KFC Kids Meals. The toy is a green plastic container with small, blue plastic animal figures inside. The bottom of the container can fit over a child's nose and mouth, which could pose a suffocation hazard to children under three years of age.
Hairstyling Irons Recalled by Farouk Systems Inc. Due to Fire and Burn Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Farouk Systems Inc., of Houston, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 5,700 WEE CHI Ceramic Hairstyling Irons. The iron's "on/off" switch was installed incorrectly. When the iron is plugged in and switch is in the "off" position, the iron remains "on," which could pose fire and burn hazards.
SCOTT Recalls Vanish Evo Bicycle Helmets Due to Head Injury Hazard. The bicycle helmet cannot properly protect from falls, posing a head injury. The helmets do not comply with the impact requirements of the CPSC safety standards.
Recall to Repair: Whitco Company LP Stadium Light Poles Can Fall Over, Posing Risk of Serious Injury and Death. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Whitco Company LP, of Fort Worth, Texas (which is out of business), is voluntarily recalling more than 2,500 Whitco Company LP poles 70 feet tall or higher. The poles can fracture or crack and fall over, posing a risk of serious injury or death to patrons and bystanders from being hit or crushed. The poles range from 1 to 4 tons increasing the risk of death if the pole falls toward a crowded stadium or onto a building.
CPSC, Homier Distributing Co. Announce Recall of Extension Cords, Portable Lights, and Fluorescent Work Lights. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Homier Distributing Co. Inc., of Huntington, Ind., is voluntarily recalling about 150,000 Extension Cords, 180,000 Portable Lights, and 54,000 Fluorescent Work Lights. The extension cords and lights have undersized wiring, are not properly polarized, have inadequate grounding, faulty electrical conections, and plastic handles that once ignited continue to burn and spread flames, posing a shock, electrocution and fire hazard to consumers.
International Marketing Source, Inc. Recalls 600 Alphabet Block Sets. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), International Marketing Source, Inc., Franklin Park, Illinois, is voluntarily recalling 600 alphabet block sets because the set's frame may separate and result in small parts that could present a fatal choking hazard to young children.
Polaris Recalls General Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles Due to Crash Hazard. The steering wheel shaft can shift and detach while in use, resulting in a loss of control and crash hazard.
Squeeze Toys Recalled. In cooperation with the Consumer Product Safety Commission, Danara International, Ltd. of South Hackensack, New Jersey, and Stahlwood Manufacturing Co., Inc., New York, New York, today announced. . a voluntary recall of several squeeze toys which the CPSC believes may cause choking and/or suffocation because the handles are small enough to lodge in the throat and obstruct the airways of children. These products have not been involved in choking deaths; however, the CPSC believes they are similar in shape and size to products that have been involved in such incidents.
Christmas Lights Recalled For Potential Shock Hazard. Toyo Industrial, Taipei, Taiwan, in cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, today announced a recall of more than a million "string-to- string" miniature Christmas light sets which may present a shock or electrocution hazard.
Coaster Company Of America Recalls Tubular Metal Bunk Beds; Collapsing Risk Cited. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Coaster Company of America, Santa Fe Springs, CA, is voluntarily offering a replacement or repair of certain children's tubular metal frame bunk beds. The upper level can fall causing the bunk bed to collapse. Collapse of the top bunk could result in injury to an occupant on the bed.
CPSC, JA-RU Inc. Announce Recall of "Blast Balls" Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), JA-RU Inc., of Jacksonville, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 43,000 "Blast Balls" toys. When struck together, the toys create a cracking sound similar to that of a cap gun. The directions instruct consumers to strike one ball against the other in the palm of hand to create the cracking sound. When consumers strike the "Blast Balls" together, sparks can ignite, posing a burn hazard.
CPSC, Firms Announce Recalls of Infant Cardigans and Stereo Speakers. The following product safety recalls were conducted by firms in cooperation with the CPSC. Tommy Hilfiger U.S.A. Inc. (Tommy Hilfiger), of New York, N.Y., is recalling about 3,800 infant cardigans. The cardigans' snaps can detach, presenting a choking hazard to infants. Polk Audio Inc., of Baltimore, Md., is recalling the mounting brackets that came with Polk M1, M2, AW/M2 (outdoor), RM5300 and RM5400 speakers. These wall-mounted speakers can have an insufficient amount of adhesive used in assembling the speaker's wall mounting bracket. They can fall off the wall, possibly hitting consumers.
Lantec, Inc. Recalls Eco-Lite Charcoal Starter. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LanTec, Inc., Litchfield, MN is voluntarily recalling approximately 100,000 bottles of Eco-Lite Charcoal Starter, 32 fl. oz. size. The product is much more flammable than ordinary charcoal lighter fluid and, if used or handled improperly around an ignition source, can be dangerous.
Southern Telecom Recalls A/C Adaptors for Polaroid Internet Tablets Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively at Big Lots. The charger for the 7-inch Polaroid tablet can overheat.
AR500 Armor Recalls Level III Body Armor Due to Risk of Gunshot Injury or Death. The body armor can fail to meet performance requirements for Level III body armor, allowing a bullet to penetrate.
Wrist Rattles and Baby Booties Recalled by Midwest-CBK Due to Choking Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Health Canada, Midwest-CBK Inc., of Union City, Tenn., is voluntarily recalling more than 10,000 wrist rattles and 11,000 pairs of baby booties in the United States and 600 wrist rattles and 700 pairs of baby booties in Canada. The pom-poms attached to the wrist rattles and booties can detach, posing a choking hazard.
Progress Lighting Recalls Indoor Light Fixtures; Lights Can Unexpectedly Fall Posing an Impact Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Progress Lighting, of Greenville, S.C., is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 Pendant-Style Ceiling-Mounted Indoor Light Fixtures. The ceiling-mount assembly that supports the light fixture can fail, causing the fixture to unexpectedly fall and injure consumers.
Bush Hog Recalls Riding Lawn Mowers Due to Laceration Hazard. The mower blade can separate from the spindle, posing a laceration hazard to the operator or bystanders.
Stihl Recalls Certain Model Chain Saws. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Stihl Inc. of Virginia Beach, Va., announced today that it is recalling approximately 50,000 series 1127 chain saws, models 029 and 039 that were manufactured from March 7, 1993 to August 12, 1994. An ignition ground wire on the saw can wear out prematurely and possibly start a fire if it comes into contact with gasoline from the saw or with any other combustible substance. Stihl Inc. has received at least one report of a fire associated with a worn-out ignition ground wire.
Walmart Recalls Rival Electric Water Kettles Due to Burn and Shock Hazards. The heating element can fail and rupture, posing shock and burn hazards to the user.
Target Recalls Dive Sticks Due to Impalement Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Target, of Minneapolis, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 365,000 Dive Sticks. The recalled dive sticks could remain in an upright position, posing an impalement hazard to young children. CPSC banned pre-weighted dive sticks in 2001.
Food Carriers Recalled by California Innovations Due to Freezer Gel Pack Ingestion Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, California Innovations Inc., of Toronto, Canada, is voluntarily recalling about 55,000 Travelin' Chef expandable thermal food carriers. Gel that contains diethylene glycol and ethylene glycol can leak out of damaged freezer gel packs, posing a poisoning hazard if ingested by children or adults.
LEGO Recalls Toy Trucks Due to Puncture Hazard to Young Children. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), LEGO Systems Inc., of Enfield, Conn., is voluntarily recalling about 358,000 LEGO EXPLORE Super Trucks. The plastic wheels on the truck can detach, exposing a metal axle. This poses a puncture hazard to young children.
National Time Fire Alarm Pull Stations Recalled by Signal Communications Due to Failure to Alert Consumers; Sold Exclusively by National Time & Signal (Recall Alert). The pull handle on the fire alarm pull station can break when manually pulled and fail to activate the alarm system.
Kolcraft, Playskool Double Reward for Return of Recalled Portable Cribs. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Kolcraft Enterprises Inc. and Playskool are offering a $120 Child Saver Reward for the return of each Playskool Travel-Lite portable crib. These cribs were recalled in 1993, yet two children died in the cribs this summer, a New Jersey infant and a Chicago toddler.
Extension Cords Recalled by Morton Paper Co.. PRODUCT: Extension Cords - Morton Paper Co. of Brooklyn, N.Y., is recalling about 75,750 extension cords. The recalled extension cords are white and brown. The cords each have three receptacles and one two-prong plug. The white cords are available in lengths of 9, 12 and 15 feet. The brown cords are available in lengths of 6, 9, 12, 15 and 20 feet. The cords are packaged in green, white and red cardboard display sleeves that are labeled in part, "HOUSEHOLD EXTENSION CORD...MADE IN CHINA." The last 5 digits of the UPC code range from 18006 through 18020. Discount stores throughout the New York Metropolitan area sold the extension cords from October 1997 through June 1998 for about $1 to $2.
Counterfeit Circuit Breakers Recalled By Specialty Lamp International Due to Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Specialty Lamp International Inc., of Deerfield Beach, Fla., is voluntarily recalling about 371,000 371,000. The recalled circuit breakers labeled ΓÇ£Square DΓÇ¥ have been determined by Square D to be counterfeit and can fail to trip when they are overloaded, posing a fire hazard to consumers.
Hollis Recalls Digital Dive Computers Due to Drowning Hazard. The DG03 dive computer can malfunction and display an incorrect tank pressure reading to the diver. This can happen when the computer is used with an optional integrated transmitter.
Cordless Electric Chainsaws Recalled Due to Injury Hazard; Distributed by Hongkong Sun Rise Trading. The chain brake guard in the cordless electric chainsaw can fail and allow the chainsaw to continue operating, posing an injury hazard to users.
Wild & Wolf Recalls Petit Collage Children’s Toy Xylophones Due to Choking Hazard. The ball on the end of the toy xylophone beater stick can separate, posing a choking hazard to young children.
CPSC, BikeE Announce Recall of Recumbent Bicycle Suspension Forks. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), BikeE Corp., of Corvallis, Ore., is voluntarily recalling 1,400 suspension forks on FX and RX model recumbent bicycles. The link pins in the forks can fall out, causing the rider to lose control of the bicycle, fall, and possibly suffer serious injuries. BikeE Corp. has received two reports of pins falling out of forks, resulting in two minor injuries to riders.
CPSC, Nautilus Inc. Announce Recall to Repair Bowflex Ultimate 2 Home Gyms. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Nautilus Inc., of Vancouver, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 17,000 Bowflex Ultimate 2 Home Gyms. One end of the leg extension cable can release from the guide pulley and swing around, potentially striking the user or a bystander.
RNG Recalls 100-Watt Bendable Solar Panels Due to Fire Hazard (Recall Alert). The solar panels can overheat, posing a risk of fire.
CPSC, Norton McNaughton of Squire, Inc. Announce Recall of Girls' Hooded Sweaters with Drawstrings. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Norton McNaughton of Squire, Inc., of New York, N.Y. is voluntarily recalling about 157,300 Energie brand girls' hooded sweaters with drawstrings. The hooded sweaters have drawstrings, posing a strangulation hazard to children.
LTD Commodities Recalls Sleeper Ottomans Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, LTD Commodities LLC, of Bannockburn, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 2,650 Fold-Out sleeper ottomans. The welding joints on the legs can break, posing a fall hazard to consumers.
IKEA Recalls Children's Wall-Mounted Lamps Due to Strangulation Hazard; One Child Death Reported. Children can get tangled in the lamp's cord and strangle. Two children in Europe pulled the lamp cords into their cribs and became tangled in the cord. One strangled.
DEWALT Recalls Cordless Reciprocating Saws for Fire Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), DEWALT Industrial Tool Co., of Towson, Md., is voluntarily recalling about 44,000 DEWALT DC305 Model Reciprocating Saws. The switch on these saws can short circuit, posing a fire hazard.
Giant Bicycle, Inc. Recalls Bicycles; Fork Can Break Causing Rider To Fall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Giant Bicycle, of Newbury Park, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 2009 model year TCR Advanced SL and SL (ISP) Bicycles and Frames. The density of the steerer tubes can cause the forks to crack and break, posing a fall hazard to the consumer.
Echo Recalls Model Cs-500VL Chain Saw. In cooperation with the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Echo Incorporated of Lake Zurich, Illinois today announced the voluntary recall of all model 500VL gasoline powered chain saws manufactured from 1979 to 1980.
Safety Recall Of Shoulder Harness On Championship Brand Bicycle Child Carrier Sold by Sears. In cooperation with the Consumer Product Safety Commission, D&R Industries, Inc., Lincolnwood, Illinois, announced a voluntary recall from consumers of the shoulder harness on a Championship Deluxe Bicycle Child Carrier sold through the Sears, Roebuck and Co. stores. The plastic buckle on some of the shoulder harnesses may unbuckle or disengage during use and a child could fall from the carrier.
CPSC, Sunrise Medical Announces Recall of 3-Wheel Hand Cycle. Sunrise Medical of Heidelberg, Germany is voluntarily recalling about 70 Spirit 470 3-Wheel Hand Cycles. The recalled hand cycles come in a variety of colors and have "SOPUR" written on both sides of the bodywork. Sunrise Medical dealers nationwide sold these hand cycles from August 2001 to July 2002 for $3,300. They were manufactured in Germany.
Children's Water Globes Recalled Due to Violation of Lead Paint Standard; Sold Exclusively at Jo-Ann Fabric and Craft Stores. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Jo-Ann Stores Inc., of Hudson, Ohio, is voluntarily recalling about 60 Children's Robbie Ducky Holiday Water Globes. The painted base of the water globes contain excessive levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
CPSC, Club Car, Inc. Announce Recall of Golf Cars. Club Car, Inc. of Augusta, Ga. is voluntarily recalling about 7300 model year 2002 Club Car gasoline-powered DS Golf Cars and Utility Vehicles. The recalled vehicles are serial numbers 0229-169750 through 0236-197543. The serial number is located on a decal just above and to the right of the accelerator pedal. The golf cars were sold from February 2002 through April 2002 through authorized Club Car dealers nationwide for $4000 to $9000.
Salton's Combination Expresso/Cappuccino Maker Voluntarily Recalled. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Salton, Inc., Deerfield, Illinois, today voluntarily recalled its model EX-10 "Three for All" coffee/expresso/cappuccino maker. This recall only involves those units, which contain a white retaining ring. It was discovered that the units containing a white retaining ring, used to hold the express0 brewing basket, may experience a disengaging of the brewing basket during the use of the machine. This in turn could cause damage to the glass carafe which may result in an increased risk of personal injury and damage to personal property.
Swing Sets Recalled for Repair Due to Risk of Top Beam Disconnecting. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), PlayPower LT Farmington Inc., of Farmington, Mo. (formerly Little Tikes Commercial Play Systems Inc.), is voluntarily recalling about 3,600 "Max Play" Single Post and "Kid Builders Arch" Swing Sets. The connection between the swing set's horizontal top beam and the vertical end support post can break, posing a risk of injury if the user falls to the ground or is hit by the beam.
LaJobi Recalls to Repair Bonavita, Babi Italia and ISSI Drop-Side Cribs Due to Entrapment, Suffocation and Fall Hazards. 
Children's Pajamas Recalled by Ishtex Textile Products Due to Violation of Federal Flammability Standard. The pajamas fail to meet the federal flammability standards for children's sleepwear. This poses a risk of burn injury to children.
The Land of Nod® Recalls Furniture Due to Lead Paint Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Land of Nod, of Northbrook, Ill., is voluntarily recalling 2,000 Antique White Furniture from the Cottage Collection. Some of the recalled furniture contains paint with high levels of lead. The lead level exceeds that allowed by the federal ban on lead-containing paint which is designed to protect children who might ingest paint chips or peelings. Lead paint is toxic if ingested by young children and can cause adverse health effects.
MobilePower Recalls Multi-Function Power Packs Due to Fire Hazard; Sold Exclusively by QVC (Recall Alert). The MobilePower Instant Boost 500 power packs can overheat.
Children's Picnic Sets Recalled by Mervyn's. Children's Picnic Sets - Mervyn's California, of Hayward, Calif., is recalling about 1,200 children's plastic picnic sets contained in clear bags. The clear bag reads "AUSTRALIA" in multicolored lettering, "Down Under" in blue lettering, and has an illustration of a koala bear face. The bag has a pink strap and piping. The picnic set inside the bag consists of four blue cups; four light blue bowls; four small, purple plates; four red plates with the bear illustration; and a set of cutlery. Mervyn's stores nationwide sold the sets from April 2000 through May 2000 for about $13.
Be Amazing! Toys Recalls Monster Science Growing Spiders Due to Serious Ingestion Hazard. The marble-sized, water-absorbing spider eggs included in this toy can be mistaken for candy by a child. If swallowed, the spider eggs can expand inside the body and block the intestine and can be life-threatening.
SimplyFun Recalls Ribbit Board Games Due to Risk of Lead Exposure. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), SimplyFun LLC, of Bellevue, Wash., is voluntarily recalling about 1,500 Ribbit Board Games. Surface paint on the five frog-shaped wooden pieces contain excess levels of lead, violating the federal lead paint standard.
Ventus Bicycle Aerobars Recalled by 3T Cycling Srl Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, BikeMine, of Oklahoma City, Okla.; Quality Bicycle Parts, of Bloomington, Minn.; Security Bicycle Accessories, of Hempstead, N.Y.; and Bicycle Technologies International, Ltd. (BTI), of Santa Fe, N.M., are voluntarily recalling about 325 Ventus Ltd™ and Ventus Team™ Bicycle Aerobars. The two rubber hand grips on the aerobars (handle bars) can loosen or slip off during use, posing a fall or injury hazard to the rider.
Horizon Hobby Recalls Blade 700 X Pro Series Helicopter Kits, Spindle Sets Due To Injury Hazard. The blades can come off the recalled radio-controlled helicopters. The letter "X" is on the helicopter.
U.S. Toy Company, Inc. Recalls Four Toys Because Of A Potential Choking Hazard. U.S. Toy Co., Inc. of Grandview, MO is voluntarily recalling four toys because small components separate from the toys and are a choking or aspiration hazard to young children.
Pro Armor Recalls Latches for Utility Vehicle Doors Due to Ejection and Laceration Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, LSI Products Inc. dba Pro Armor of Riverside, Cal., is voluntarily recalling about 5,200 latches for utility vehicle doors. The latch pin can disengage from the latch allowing the door to open while the vehicle is moving. This can pose a risk of ejection of an unrestrained rider and impact or laceration hazards.
CPSC, Hurricane Products Announce Recall of Propane Regulators. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Hurricane Products, of Valencia, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 20,000 propane regulators. These propane regulators, manufactured by Chen Fong Enterprise Co. Ltd., of Taiwan, are used to regulate the flow of propane from pressurized containers. These regulators can leak propane, which can result in a fire or explosion. The leak can cause the appliance flame to be larger than expected, possibly causing burns to nearby consumers and cause nearby combustibles to catch fire.
Decathlon USA Announces Recall of Quechua Tents and Canopies Due to Flammability Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Decathlon USA, of Wilmington, Mass., is voluntarily recalling about 22,000 2006 Quechua Brand Tents and Canopies. The tents may fail to meet the industry's flame resistant standard, posing a fire hazard.
CPSC, Tek Nek Toys Announce Recall of Children's Riding Vehicles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Tek Nek Toys, of Mokena, Ill., is recalling about 294,000 battery-powered children's riding vehicles to replace the battery chargers. The vehicles' battery charger or wires can overheat, presenting fire and injury hazards to children.
Franklin Fueling Systems Recalls Gas Station Hose/Swivel Fitting Sets Due to Fire, Explosion Hazards. The swivel fitting can separate from the hose, causing fuel to leak, posing a fire and explosion hazard.
CPSC, Gerry Baby Products Announce Recall to Repair Baby Monitors. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Gerry Baby Products of Denver, Colo., is recalling about 86,000 rechargeable baby monitors sold under the Clear Choice brand name. When an electrical short occurs, the rechargeable battery can cause the monitor's "parent" unit to smoke and flame.
CPSC And Amscan Recall Bracelet, Necklace Party Favor Toys. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Amscan Inc. of Harrison, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling about 6,000 party favors bracelets (six in a pack), model number 39231, and 24,000 party favors necklaces (five in a pack), model number 39116.
CPSC Warns Of Potential For Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Involving Improperly Maintained Coleman 8600 Solar Pak Mobile Home Furnaces. An inspection and discount replacement program for some 100,000 Model 8600 Solar Pak mobile home furnaces is being undertaken by the Coleman Co. Manufactured Housing Products Division of Wichita, Kansas in voluntary cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission.
CPSC, Ideal Distributors Inc. Announce Recall of Pacifiers. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Ideal Distributors Inc., of Chicago, Ill. is voluntarily recalling about 1,000 Cachito Pacifiers. The nipples can detach from the base, posing a choking hazard to young children.
Waterlogic Recalls Water Cooling, Heating Systems Due to Fire Hazard. The hot water tank in AquaMark, Coolersmart, Culligan, Innowave, Waterlogic and Xstream Water-brand water dispensers can overheat and smoke or catch fire.
CPSC, Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co. Announce Recall of Fragranced Candles. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co., of New York, N.Y., is voluntarily recalling approximately 35,000 fragranced candles housed in tin containers sold in the U.S. These candles can burn with a higher than normal flame, posing a potential fire hazard.
CPSC, Little Tikes Co. Announce Toddle Tots Dinosaur Mountain Playset Recall. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Little Tikes Company of Hudson, Ohio, is recalling approximately 160,000 Toddle Tots Dinosaur Mountain playsets. Small plastic cups that hold palm trees may detach, posing a choking risk to young children.
Bond Manufacturing Co. Issues Recall for Folding Recliner Chairs That Can Collapse and Injure Users. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Bond Manufacturing Co., of Baypoint, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 68,000 Rockingham Deluxe Lounge Chairs (also sold as Vanderwall Folding Recliner Chairs). The chairs can collapse or fall backward due to faulty support brackets or weak frames, posing fall and severe laceration hazards to consumers.
CPSC, New York Zion Trading Corp. Announce Recall of Electric Fans. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), New York Zion Trading Corp., of Flushing, New York. is voluntarily recalling about 2,500 Portable oscillating electric fans. The wiring is undersized and the power plug is not polarized, creating fire and shock hazards.
Rehvac Manufacturing Recalls Safety Relief Plugs Due to Injury Hazard; Plugs Used on Nitrous Oxide Systems and Heating and Air Conditioning Service Tools. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Rehvac Manufacturing Co., of San Antonio, Texas, is voluntarily recalling about 4,700 Relief Plugs Used on Nitrous Oxide Systems and HVAC Service Tools. The safety relief plug can allow pressure to build in the cylinder of an HVAC pressure testing tool or Nitrous Oxide system. If the cylinder is overfilled and overheated it can burst, posing an injury hazard to consumers.
CPSC, Robertshaw Controls Co. Announce Recall of Gas Control Valves on Water Heaters. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Robertshaw Controls Co., of Long Beach, Calif. is voluntarily recalling about 178,000 Robertshaw R110 Series Gas Control Valves. Screws on some water heater valves could break. If this happens, gas could leak from the valve, which poses a risk of gas explosion and fire.
CPSC, DesignPac Announce Recall of Lamp Oil. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, DesignPac, of Northlake, Ill is voluntarily recalling oil lamp boxed sets . The bottles of paraffin oil in these sets do not have the child-resistant closures required by federal law.
Calphalon Recalls Cutlery Knives Due to Laceration Hazard. The blade on Contemporary Cutlery knives can break during use.
Infantino Recalls Infant Sling Carriers Due to Fall Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Infantino LLC, of San Diego, Calif., is voluntarily recalling about 100,000 SlingRider Infant Carriers. The radius triple clamps on these motorcycles can crack during operation, posing a risk that the fork of the bike could separate and result in serious injury or death to the rider.
Toro Recalls Zero Turn Mowers Due to Burn Hazard. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Toro Co., of Bloomington, Minn., is voluntarily recalling about 4,100 Toro Z Master ZRT Mowers (liquid-cooled models only). The coolant overflow container on the recalled mowers can become over-pressurized and cause hot coolant to spray on the operator. This poses a burn hazard to consumers.
The Land of Nod Recalls Children's Canopies Due to Entrapment and Strangulation Hazards. In cooperation with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), The Land of Nod, of Northbrook, Ill., is voluntarily recalling about 2,400 Home Sweet Playhome Canopies. A child's head could get entrapped in the canopy's window openings, posing entrapment and strangulation hazards.
CPSC, Playskool Announce Recall To Repair The 1-2-3 High Chair. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and Playskool today announced a voluntary recall to repair program for all of Playskool's 1-2-3 High Chairs. Playskool has learned that plastic joints on some of its 1-2-3 High Chairs have cracked. These cracks may cause the high chair to collapse. Playskool has received ten reports of injuries, including bumps, bruises and one concussion.
Toro Recalls Recycler Mowers Due to Injury Hazard (Recall Alert). Mowers were assembled with an incorrect blade driver and blade combination, which can cause the blade to break, resulting in an injury hazard.